■ 


J?U 

f/f 

ny 

it10 

MA 

NEW 


TE  IKA  A IAUI; 

OR, 

ZEALAND  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS. 


ILLUSTRATING  THE 

ORIGIN,  MANNERS,  CUSTOMS,  MYTHOLOGY,  RELIGION,  RITES, 
SONGS,  PROVERBS,  FABLES,  AND  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  MAORI 
AND  POLYNESIAN  RACES  IN  GENERAL  ; 


TOGETHER  WITH  THE 

GEOLOGY,  NATURAL  HISTORY,  PRODUCTIONS,  AND  CLIMATE 
OF  THE  COUNTRY. 

Second  Edition. 


titjj  mtmmraa  Illustration:*. 


SOUK 


UIQ  £ 


LIBRA 


REV.  RICHARD  TAYLOR,  M.A.,  F.G.S., 

A Missionary  in  New  Zealand  for  more  than  Thirty  Years. 


LONDON : 

WILLIAM  MACINTOSH,  24,  PATERNOSTER  ROW ; 


v AND 

H.  IRESON  JONES,  WANGANUI,  NEW  ZEALAND. 


MDCCCLXX. 

/rye 


*^\THSO  NIaJj'  '■> 


U3XAR\t* 


PREFACE 


TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION. 


In  presenting  Te  Ika  a Maui  to  the  Public,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  commence  with  saying,  that  this  was 
formerly  the  only  name  which  the  Natives  had  for  the 
North  Island,  and  that  it  is  nearly  identical  with  that 
which  Cook  first  received ; being  literally  The  Fish 
of  Maui,  the  Maori  Creator,  who  first  drew  up  this 
second  Britain  “from  out  the  azure  main.” 

The  name  of  New  Zealand  has  succeeded  it;  and 
it  seems  a pity  that  so  noble  an  appendage  of  the 
British  Crown,  which  has  been  gained,  not  so  much 
by  the  power  of  our  arms,  as  by  the  voluntary  con- 
sent of  its  inhabitants,  through  the  influence  of  the 
Gospel,  should  still  retain  so  unmeaning  a name, 
which  was  not  even  given  by  its  first  discoverer. 
The  good  taste  of  the  present  age  has  re-named  the 
neighbouring  Continent  and  its  attendant  Isle.  Yan 
Diemen’s  Land  and  New  Holland  will  soon  be  ob- 
solete, being  supplanted  by  the  more  euphonious 

names  of  Australia  and  Tasmania.  Why  should  not 

a 2 


PREFACE 


TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 


In  presenting  to  the  Public  another  edition  of  Te 
Ika  a Maui,  or  New  Zealand  and  its  Inhabitants,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  state  that,  while  all  relating  to 
the  Maori  and  his  myths,  &c.,  which  appeared  in  the 
former  work  has  been  retained  in  this,  so  much  new 
matter  is  added,  and  so  many  other  subjects  intro- 
duced, that,  to  a certain  extent,  it  may  be  regarded 
as  a new  Work.  The  original  plan  has  been  altered, 
to  embrace  the  Ethnology  of  the  Polynesian  races 
in  general.  Nor  have  the  Geological  remarks  been 
limited  to  New  Zealand,  but  they  are  now  extended 
to  the  Southern  Hemisphere.  Living  in  a country 
subject  to  earthquakes,  and  having  carefully  observed 
them,  the  Author  now  ventures  to  give  the  results. 
Nor  has  he  altogether  overlooked  the  Natural  History 
and  Botany  of  those  Isles,  especially  as  taken  in  con- 
nection with  the  probable  geological  period  to  which 
they  belong. 

The  present  Work  may  be  viewed  as  a digest  of 


Vlll 


PREFACE  TO  SECOND  EDITION. 


a mass  of  notes  made  by  the  Author  during  a residence 
of  more  than  thirty  years  in  those  parts,  and  he  trusts 
it  will  prove  a means  of  directing  the  public  mind  to 
the  importance  of  Britain’s  Australasian  Provinces,  and 
aid  in  cementing  more  closely  the  union  between  the 
parent  and  her  offspring,  so  that  the  day  may  be  far 
distant  when  the  several  parts  of  the  present  Grand 
Empire  shall  be  severed  asunder,  but  each  section 
continue  to  view  the  others  as  portions  of  the  same, 
and  mutually  necessary  to  the  stability  and  welfare 
of  the  whole. 


Castle  Cottage,  Porchester, 
January  ls£,  1870. 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction 

CHAPTER  I. 

PAGE 

I 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Two  Races  which  Peopled  Polynesia  . , 

12 

Our  Race  and  its  Origin 

CHAPTER  III. 

6l 

Civilization 

CHAPTER  IV. 

91 

Religion 

CHAPTER  V. 

97 

Mythology 

CHAPTER  VI. 

107 

Mythology  ( continued ) . 

CHAPTER  VII. 

• i34 

Tapu 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

163 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Whare-Kura. — Religious  Worship. — Infant  Baptism. — War  Ceremonies  174 


CHAPTER  X. 

Fishing  Ceremonies. — Manner  of  Hunting  the  Rat. — Witchcraft. — Niu. 


— Cursing. — Kura — Red  ......  197 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Wakapakoko— Images  . . . . » . .211 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Singular  Rites  and  Customs  relating  to  the  Dead  . .215 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Singular  Rites  and  Customs  relating  to  the  Dead  ( continued ) . , 229 


X 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XIV.  page 

Traditions  and  Legends  . . . . . . 235 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Traditions  and  Legends  ( continued). — Original  Canoes  . . 265 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Wakatauki,  or  Proverbs. — Fables  .....  293 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Songs. — Mottoes  .....'.  306 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Personal  Ornaments. — Moko,  or  Tattoo. — Embalming. — Names. — De- 
grees of  Consanguinity  . . . . . 3 1 7 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Dreams. — Marriage. — Eating. — Feasts. — Night  Speaking  . . 333 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Amusements. — Chiefs. — Tenure  of  Land. — Barter  . . . 345 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Seasons — Nga  Takapou. — Time. — Fire.  — Measures. — Koro  Matua — 

The  Thumb  or  Great  Toe  . . . . . .361 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Language  ........  373 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Origin,  as  traced  by  Language. — Affinity  of  Words. — Monosyllabic 
Roots. — Sikayana  Words. — Polynesian  Dialects. — New  Zealand 
and  Polynesian  Races. — Tribes,  Population,  and  Customs  . 384 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Maori  Middens  . . . . . . . .414 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

The  Age  of  New  Zealand  ......  424 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  Geology  of  New  Zealand. — A Visit  to  Roto  Mahana  . . 446 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

General  Geological  Features  of  our  Globe  ....  470 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Means  of  Support. — Houses. — Native  Ovens.-— Pua  bread  . . 493 


CONTENTS. 


XI 


CHAPTER 

Hongi. — Tareha. — Te  Heuheu  . 

XXX. 

PAGE 

509 

CHAPTER 

Te  Rauparaha  and  Rangihaeata  . 

XXXI. 

526' 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Hone  Heke. — Tapouka. — Tuhawaiki. — Mamaku. — Manihera  and  Ke- 
reopa. — Andrew  Powers. — Jackson’s  Story 

545 

CHAPTER 

Samuel  Marsden 

XXXIII. 

582 

CHAPTER 

Natural  History  of  New  Zealand 

XXXIV. 

602 

CHAPTER 

XXXV. 

Natural  History  of  New  Zealand  ( continued ). — Vegetating  Caterpillar. 

— Vitality  ........  629 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


Ignis  Fatuus. — Ocean  Light. — Adam  and  Eve. — Steatite. — Magnetic 
Iron  Sand. — Working  Green  Stone. — Manna. — Counting. — Cli- 


mate 

. 654 

Botany  . 

CHAPTER 

XXXVII. 

669 

Chronology. 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

—New  Zealand  Chiefs  and  the  Queen 

• 703 

ERRATA. 

Page  493 — Chapter  XXIX  should  read  “ XXVIII,”  and  so  on. 

Page  631 — Head  line  “ Samuel  Marsden,”  should  read  “Natural 
History.” 


1 


1 


LIST  OF  ENGRAVINGS  AND  VIGNETTES. 


1 Food  Stores  in  Horowhenua  Lake 

To  face 

PAGE 

16 

4 A Native  Crossing  a River  on  a Moki,  or  Bulrush  Raft 

To  face 

19 

^ White  Island,  in  the  Bay  of  Plenty  

To  face 

248 

^The  Grave  of  an  Australian  Native,  with  his  Name,  Rank, 
cut  in  Hieroglyphics  on  the  Trees  ... 

Tribe,  &c., 
To  face 

378 

v'A  Geyser  and  Warm  Spring 

To  face 

45° 

VA  Pah  on  the  Wanganui  ... 

To  face 

555 

^-The  New  Zealand  Fern  Tree 

To  face 

669 

New  Zealand  Under-Ground  Parasite 

To  face 

696 

Maories  Preparing  a Canoe  for  Sea 

1 

A Green  Stone  Mere,  an  Ancient  Weapon  of  War 

1 1 

The  Tomb  of  Heuheu,  Chief  of  Taupo 

12 

A Welsh  Coracle  ... 

... 

60 

Hieroglyphic  from  the  Temple  of  Philoe  

61 

A Green  Jade  Mere,  or  Patu  Pounamu,  (presented  to  the  Queen ) 

90 

A Wata,  or  Food  Store  ...  ...  ... 

91 

Ancient  Bell  found  at  Wangarei 

96 

Native  Church  at  Otaki  Manganui-a-te-ao 

97 

A Memorial  Idol,  and  Priest  invoking  his  god  ... 

... 

106 

Crying  for  the  Dead 

107 

A Memorial  Idol  of  a Chief  slain  in  Battle 

133 

A Chief’s  House 

134 

The  Tomb  of  Wiremu  Kingi,  Te  Rangitaki’s  father  ... 

162 

A Tapued  Chief  eating  with  a Fern  Stalk 

163 

He  Rakau  Walcapaparanga,  or  Genealogical  Board 

... 

173 

Te  Heuheu’s  Tomb  at  Pukawa  .. 

... 

174 

The  Prow  of  a War  Canoe 

196 

Wangaroa  Harbour... 

197 

Carved  Box... 

210 

Atene,  on  the  Wanganui  River  ...  

211 

Basket  with  Gods... 

214 

A view  of  the  Reinga 

215 

A Frame  to  Deposit  Corpses  in  until  Decomposed 

218 

XIV 


ENGRAVINGS  AND  VIGNETTES. 


A Carving  on  a Tomb,  representing  the  Lizard  which  causes  Death  ... 

Atene  and  its  Tombs  ...  ...  ...  

The  Pa  of  Te  Arero  on  the  Manga-nui-a-te-ao  ...  

Wareake,  a Boiling  Mud  Pool  at  Kaingaroa 
He  Tieheru,  or  Boat  Scoope 

A view  on  the  Manga-nui-a-te-ao,  a Tributary  of  the  Wanganui 
A Rata  Tree  clasping  another 

New  Zealand  Fern  Trees  and  Forest  Scenery  ...  

He  Kokoti,  an  Ancient  Bone  Weapon,  ( presented  to  the  Queen ) 
Wangaroa  Harbour... 

He  Koauau,  or  Musical  Pipe,  made  out  of  a Whale's  Tooth 

Tattooed  Head,  carved  by  Hongi,  and  Tattoo  of  a Woman’s  Chin  ... 
The  Graves  of  Manihera  and  Kereopa,  and  their  Murderers  attending 
a Service  at  them 
He  Papa,  or  Carved  Dish 
Boat  Harbour  in  Motutaiko,  Taupo  Lake 
He  Kahu,  Native  Kite 
He  Ko,  or  Native  Spade 
Paparoa,  a Rapid  of  the  Wanganui  River 

He  Taiaha,  or  Chief’s  Staff  

A Native  School 

He  Papa,  or  Carved  Box 

Ancient  Sea  Cliff  Inland  on  the  Mokau  ...  

Maori,  Australian,  and  Ancient  Egyptian  Adzes, 

He  Pareare,  or  Snow  Shoe  

A Forest  Encampment 

Remnants  of  Ancient  Celtic  Clothing  . . 

An  Ancient  Egyptian,  and  Modern  Maori  Hoe,  he  Tima 

Kerikeri,  Bay  of  Islands 

Banksia  Solonis,  Extinct  Banksia  Solonis,  and  Banksia  Serata,  existing 
New  Zealand  Fern  Leaf,  Grevillea  Kymmeana  Fossil,  Lomatia  Li- 
nearis, existing,  and  Fossil  Fern,  Dudley 

New  Zealand  Adiantum  Reneforme,  Living  Fern  

Roto  Mahana,  the  Warm  Lake  and  its  Boiling  Springs 
Remarkable  Boulders  at  Wangape,  on  the  North-West  Coast 

Limestone  Cave  near  the  Mokau,  at  Pukemapau  . 

Hine  Moa,  Basaltic  Columns  near  Rotorua 

Cooking  in  a Boiling  Spring  

Mitre  Peak,  Milford  Sound 

Mount  Metal  and  Pembroke  Peak,  Milford  Sound 

Taranaki  from  Wareata  

Auckland,  in  its  early  days  


PAGE 

228 

229 
235 
249 

264 

265 

292 

293 

305 

306 
3i6 
3W 

333 

344 

345 

346 

360 

361 

372 

373 

383 

384 

395 

413 

414 
421 

423 

424 
435 

437 

445 

446 

457 

461 

463 

469 

470 

489 

492 

493 


ENGRAVINGS  AND  VIGNETTES. 


XV 


Maori  Weapons 

Tamihana  Tarapipi,  Chief  of  Matamata,  a true  Patriot...  ..  ... 

Monument  of  Te  Heuheu  at  Taupo  ...  ...  

Maori  Ways  of  Dressing  the  Hair  ... 

A Native  Comb,  He Heru ...  ...  

Hori  Kingi  Te  Anaua,  the  Wanganui  Chief  and  firm  Friend  of  the 
European 

John  Williams  Hipango,  who  fell  at  Ohotahi,  in  Defence  of  the  Wan- 
ganui Settlement 

A Monument  erected  at  Wanganui  by  the  Province  of  Wellington,  to 
the  Memory  of  the  Loyal  Natives  who  fell  at  Moutoa 
Aperhama  Ruke,  Head  Teacher  of  Wanganui 
Norfolk  and  Philip’s  Island 

Choetodon,  Arara  ...  

Boulder  Bank,  Nelson 
A Vegetating  Cicada 
Sphaeria,  or  Vegetating  Caterpillars 
Mission  House,  Putiki,  Wanganui 
Loligo  Vulgaris  ^.. 

Friends  taking  leave  at  Hikurangi,  on  the  Wanganui  River 


PAGE 

508 

509 
520 
522 

525 

526 

545 

581 

582 
602 

628 

629 
647 

653 

654 
668 
669 


^ FIRST  PLATE. 

Names  of  Birds  in  Colored  Plate,  ( frontispiece . ) 1.  Dinornis  Elephantopus, 

Moa.  2.  Notornis  Mantellie.  3.  Apteryx,  Khvi.  4.  D.  Didiformis.  5.  Ap- 
teryx Australis.  6.  D.  Gigantea. 

THE  PLANTS. 

A.  Ti  Cordeline  Stricta  (old  tree).  B.  Nikau,  Arica  Sapida.  C.  Harakeke , 
Phormium  Tenax.  D.  Totten,  Arundo  Australis.  E.  Ti,  Cordeline  (young 
tree).  F.  Toi,  Dracena.  G.  Kiekie,  Freycinetia  Banksii.  PI.  Kowarawara, 
Astelia.  I.  Horoeke,  Aralia. 


SECOND  PLATE. 

1 . Diadema  Auge.  2.  Dialanthus  Taylori.  3.  Apus  Cyclops. 


TE  IKA  A MAUI; 

OR, 

NEW  ZEALAND  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS. 


MAORIES  PREPARING  A CANOE  FOR  SEA. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Civilized  man  is  too  apt  to  look  down  upon  tlie  more 
unenlightened  portion  of  his  race  as  belonging  to  an  inferior 
order  of  beings ; ignorance  or  interest  has  given  rise  to  many 
calumnies  against  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  remote  lands , 
especially  if  differing  from  us  in  color. 

To  entertain  better  and  more  correct  feelings  towards 
those  commonly  regarded  as  savages,  a fuller  acquaint- 
ance with  them  is  necessary,  and  according  to  the  degree 


2 


INTRODUCTION. 


attained,  will  their  claims  to  brotherhood  be  allowed,  and 
the  conviction  be  forced  upon  the  mind,  that,  from  what- 
ever causes  they  have  fallen  into  their  present  degraded 
state,  it  is  not  their  natural  one,  but  the  effect  of  various 
untoward  circumstances,  which  have  combined,  gradually 
to  sink  them  from  a higher  to  a lower  position,  and  that 
when  those  causes  are  removed,  they  will  again  rise  to  their 
former  standing,  and  rank  with  the  more  favored  sections 
of  the  human  family. 

As  the  knowledge  of  these  aboriginal  races  increases,  and 
our  acquaintance  with  their  language,  manners,  and  customs 
becomes  more  perfect,  they  will  be  found  to  possess  mind  as 
well  as  ourselves,  and  that  they  only  want  similar  advantages 
to  obtain  an  equal  enlargement  of  it.  Our  ideas  are  so 
different  from  those  of  primitive  and  isolated  races,  that 
they  seem  at  first  inferior  to  us,  but  when  we  can  enter  into 
their  feelings,  and  understand  the  causes  which  have  operated 
in  producing  that  difference  of  thought,  the  result  will  appear 
quite  natural. 

Philosophically  viewing  the  subject,  even  the  Australian, 
who  has  been  classed  the  lowest,  and  viewed  as  more  closely 
allied  to  the  brute  than  to  the  human  species,  will  be  found 
to  possess  mind,  ingenuity,  contrivance,  and  perfection  too, 
in  his  way,  far  beyond  what  might  be  expected ; and  were 
one  of  our  laborers,  or  even  a more  enlightened  member  of 
society,  to  be  placed  in  a similar  position,  it  would  be  a long 
time  before  he  could  attain  an  equal  degree  of  knowledge,  in 
any  of  those  arts,  which  are  needful  for  the  support  of  life. 

This  is  no  fanciful  assertion.  How  many  instances  are  there 
of  shipwrecked  mariners  having  been  cast  away  on  uninhabited 
islands,  who,  deprived  of  everything,  have  not  shown  any  of 
their  ingenuity  in  procuring  food  and  raiment ; or,  when 
thrown  amongst  savages,  have  sunk  even  below  their  level. 
Excepting  perhaps  the  backwoodsman  of  America,  few  would 
feel  themselves  equal  to  supply  their  necessities,  when  their 
usual  means  of  support  were  suddenly  cut  off.  Travellers  in 
the  wilds  of  Australia  or  New  Zealand,  where  all  the  comforts 
of  civilized  life  are  wanting,  well  know  how  readily  they  fall 


INTRODUCTION. 


3 


into  the  habits  of  the  native;  the  customs  of  domestic  life 
cannot  then  be  observed ; the  squalid  filth  of  those  who  have 
made  long  journeys,,  is  often  far  beyond  that  of  the  natives ; 
and  in  obtaining  food,  how  far  is  the  boasted  member  of 
civilized  life  behind  the  despised  savage;  the  native  of  blew 
Holland  not  only  knows  where  to  look  for  it,  but  how  to 
obtain  it ; he  can  fabricate  from  the  raw  materials  of  the 
wilderness  the  proper  snare  or  net ; he  can  make  his  spear 
and  use  it  with  unfailing  success ; barren  and  unproduc- 
tive as  his  country  appears  in  furnishing  food,  it  has  a 
sufficiency  for  those  who  know  how  to  find  and  take  it. 

If,  under  such  circumstances,  the  Australian  has  been  en- 
abled to  find  support  where  the  European  could  not — and  the 
preservation  of  life  is  the  first  principle  implanted  in  the 
human  breast — it  may  safely  be  concluded  that  he  is  not 
deficient  in  mind,  but  how  much  more  is  this  the  case  with 
the  New  Zealander.  Some  years  ago,  a Settler's  Journey 
along  the  west  coast  of  the  Middle  Island  was  published  in 
the  Government  Gazette  : this  settler,  accompanied  by  several 
natives,  was  absent  nearly  two  years  ; during  that  long 
period  all  his  own  stock  of  supplies  failed,  and  for  months 
he  was  entirely  dependent  on  the  natives  for  his  support  : 
had  they  not  known  where  and  how  to  procure  food  in  that 
desolate  and  uninhabited  part,  the  entire  party  must  have 
perished.* 

But  to  return  to  the  subject  of  civilization.  With  us, 
society  is  divided  to  an  indefinite  extent ; one  is  brought  up 
in  one  .useful  art,  and  another  in  another ; with  few  excep- 
tions there  are  none  who  can  turn  their  hands  to  any  other 
than  their  own  peculiar  calling,  and  a great  many  to  none  at 
all.  The  New  Zealander,  on  the  contrary,  is  acquainted 
with  every  department  of  knowledge,  common  to  his  race  : 
he  can  build  his  house,  can  make  his  canoe,  his  nets, 
hooks,  and  lines ; he  can  manufacture  snares  to  suit  every 
bird,  and  form  his  traps  ; he  can  fabricate  his  garments, 
and  every  tool  and  implement  required,  whether  for  agri- 

* See  Brenner’s  Journal  of  Expedition  along  the  West  Coast  of  the  Middle 
Island  of  New  Zealand. 

B 2 


4 


INTRODUCTION. 


culture  or  war  ; he  can  make  ornaments  of  ivory  or  of 
the  hardest  stone,  and  these  too  with  the  most  simple  and 
apparently  unsuitable  instruments,  sawing  his  ivory  without 
loss,  with  a muscle-shell,  and  his  hard  green  jade  stone  one 
piece  with  another,  with  only  the  addition  of  a little  sand  and 
water  ; and  all  these  works,  it  must  be  remembered,  he  could 
accomplish  without  the  aid  of  iron,  which  was  unknown 
before  Cookes  time.  It  is  not  a single  individual,  or  a few 
only,  who  are  adepts  in  these  various  arts,  but  all.  The 
implements  they  make,  they  also  know  how  to  use ; they 
can  hunt,  fish,  and  fight.  In  the  battle-field  they  are 
warriors ; in  the  council  orators ; their  skill  in  military 
tactics  has-  elicited  the  wonder  of  our  military  men,  and 
the  present  sad  war  has  proved  them  to  be  enemies  not  to 
be  despised.  It  would  be  no  easy  matter  to  find  Europeans 
who,  in  so  many  respects,  could  equal  the  contemned  savage 
of  New  Zealand. 

Such  general  knowledge  made  the  native  at  home  wherever 
he  might  be.  The  author  has  often  had  opportunities  of 
admiring  this  power  of  adaptation  to  present  circumstances ; 
when  encamped  with  his  little  party  in  pouring  rain,  he 
has  been  surprised  at  the  short  time  it  took,  to  erect  a 
comfortable  water-tight  shed,  to  produce  fire  by  fric- 
tion, to  find  fuel  and  ignite  it,  to  seek  food  and  sit  down 
comfortably  to  enjoy  it,  and  this  before  many  would  have 
made  up  their  minds  what  to  do.  An  instance  of  this 
occurred  some  years  ago,  when  the  late  Allan  Cunningham, 
the  well-known  botanist  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  was 
accompanied  by  one  of  our  missionaries  on  a journey  through 
a New  Zealand  forest ; whilst  busily  employed  in  examining 
its  varied  productions,  they  allowed  their  natives  to  push  on 
to  a spot  where  they  usually  encamped,  and,  carried  away  by 
their  love  of  nature,  did  not  perceive  the  lapse  of  time,  until 
they  were  suddenly  overtaken  by  the  shades  of  night ; to 
make  their  uncomfortable  position  worse,  it  set  in  rainy ; to 
overtake  their  companions  was  impracticable,  for  such,  is 
the  gloom  of  a New  Zealand  forest,  and  the  over-grown 
ill- defined  tracks  through  it,  that  it  is  quite  impossible  to 


INTRODUCTION. 


O 


find  tlie  way  in  the  dark ; but,  instead  of  trying  to  erect 
a shed,  or  light  a fire  in  the  native  style,  what  did  they  do  ? 
Just  what  most  Europeans  would  in  similar  circumstances — 
nothing  at  all ; they  felt  themselves  perfectly  helpless — they 
stood  under  a tree  the  whole  of  the  night,  without  fire,  food, 
or  shelter.  The  effects  of  that  night  proved  fatal  to  poor 
Cunningham ; he  caught  a violent  cold,  which  settled  on  his 
lungs,  and  in  a few  months  he  was  in  his  grave. 

The  native  is  not  deficient  in  those  arts  which  are  essential  to 
his  comfort.  His  house  is  constructed  with  great  skill  and  even 
elegance,*  his  garments  with  much  beauty,  and  ornamented 
with  a border  of  elaborately  wrought  embroidery ; his  little 
farm  is  tilled  with  the  greatest  care,  not  a weed  to  be  seen ; 
in  fact,  he  has  carried  those  arts  with  which  he  is  acquainted 
to  as  much  perfection,  as  they  are  apparently  capable  of. 
This  is  not  the  character  of  the  savage  : if,  then,  in  these 
respects  we  cannot  view  the  Maori  race  as  such,  it  must 
be  in  their  social  state;  when  their  fierce  and  unsubdued 
passions  have  full  play  in  their  cruel  and  bloody  wars,  and 
their  former  cannibal  feasts, — these  mark  the  savage.  The 
truth  cannot  be  concealed,  neither  is  it  desirable  to  do  so ; 
but  is  not  human  nature  in  its  unrenewed  state,  much  the 
same  every  where  ? Are  there  no  European  savages  as 
well  ? 

When  the  way  in  which  the  New  Zealanders  lived  is 
considered,  the  crimes  they  committed  cannot  be  wondered 
at.  Shut  out  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  without  any  to  set 
them  a pattern  of  what  was  right,  or  to  reprove  what  was 
wrong ; is  it  surprising,  that  morally  they  should  have 
degenerated,  even  from  the  standard  of  their  forefathers  ? 
They  were  not  always  addicted  to  war,  neither  were  they 
always  cannibals ; the  remembrance  of  the  origin  of  those 
horrid  customs,  is  still  preserved  amongst  them.  If  the 

* The  natives  rendered  valuable  assistance  in  this  sort  of  work  (building 
houses  for  the  Port  Nicholson  settlers),  at  which  they  were  very  expert.  It 
must  be  confessed  that  the  huts  built  by  them  were  much  superior  to  those  of 
our  handiwork  ; many  of  them,  indeed,  deserved  to  be  called  houses,  and  were, 
when  I quitted  Port  Nicholson,  still  used  by  emigrants  of  all  classes. — 4th  page 
of  Hon.  H.  W.  Petrels  New  Zealand:  Smith,  Elder,  & Co.,  London,  1841. 


6 


INTRODUCTION. 


progressive  development  theory  were  true,,  aboriginal  races 
should  have  progressively  advanced ; every  successive  genera- 
tion should  have  added  some  improvement  to  the  one  which 
preceded  it ; but  experience  proves  the  contrary.  A remark- 
able instance  of  this  may  be  adduced  in  the  fact,  that  the 
New  Zealanders  have  retrograded,  even  since  the  days  of 
Captain  Cook  ; they  then  possessed  large  double  canoes, 
decked,  with  houses  on  them,  similar  to  those  of  Tahaiti  and 
Hawaii,  in  which,  traditionally,  their  ancestors  arrived;  it 
is  now  more  than  half  a century  since  the  last  was  seen . 
Tradition  also  states,  that  they  had  finer  garments  in  former 
days,  and  of  different  kinds  ; that,  like  their  reputed  ances- 
tors, they  made  cloth  from  the  bark  of  trees;  the  name 
is  preserved,  but  the  manufacture  has  ceased.  There  are 
remains  also  in  their  language,  which  would  lead  us  to  sup- 
pose, that  like  the  inhabitants  of  Tonga,  they  once  possessed 
a kingly  form  of  government,  and  though  they  have  now  nt> 
term  to  express  that  high  office,  still  they  have  words,  which 
are  evidently  derived  from  the  very  one  denoting  a king  in 
Tonga.*  Their  traditions,  which  are  preserved,  also  establish 
the  same  fact,  and  perhaps  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  is  their 
language ; its  fullness,  richness,  and  close  affinity  not  only  in 
words  but  grammar  to  the  Sanscrit,  carries  the  mind  back  to 
a time  when  literature  could  not  have  been  unknown. 

To  what  then  can  their  subsequent  deterioration  be 
referred  ? They  state  they  came  from  a distant  land ; that 
the  cradle  of  their  race  was  an  island  of  narrow  limits  ; 
insufficient  to  maintain  its  population,  one  portion  thrust 
out  the  other,  a fleet  of  canoes  left  to  seek  another  abode; 
they  found  several,  from  which,  being  either  too  contracted, 
or  inhabited  by  people  averse  to  their  stay,  they  again  em- 
barked, and  finally  a few,  reduced  to  the  greatest  straits, 
reached  New  Zealand.  These  repeated  emigrations  must 
have  diminished  their  original  stock  of  knowledge ; like 
a vessel  in  a storm  which  is  compelled  to  be  lightened, 

* The  word  How  in  Tonga  signifies  king  ; in  Maori,  Waka-han  is  to  command ; 
the  Kaiwhakahati  is  the  man  who  stands  in  the  centre  of  a war  canoe  to  direct 
the  movements  of  the  crew.  It  also  signifies  the  one  who  commands  in  war. 


INTRODUCTION. 


7 


the  richest  wares  are  thrown  overboard,  one  bale  follows 
another,  the  least  required  for  the  preservation  of  life  go  first, 
and  those  only  which  are  essentially  necessary  are  preserved. 
Again,  one  tribe  is  driven  away  by  another  more  powerful ; 
weakened  in  numbers,  and  disheartened  by  constant  defeats, 
it  continually  retires  from  its  foes,  until,  at  last,  without 
means  of  preserving  its  first  state,  it  sinks  lower  and  lower 
in  the  scale  of  existence  : this  will  account  for  the  degraded 
state  of  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  Chatham  Isles ; 
driven  from  the  mainland,  they  fled  to  islands  possessing  few 
natural  productions;  can  it  therefore,  be  wondered  that  they 
should  be  less  advanced  than  the  natives  who  conquered  them; 
hence  their  inferiority  in  their  garments,  houses,  and  canoes. 
They  present  an  instance  to  what  a sad  state  man  may  fall, 
when  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  his  race,  and  mind  is  deprived 
of  the  benefit  of  "fellow  mind ; how  unable  is  it  to  bear  up 
against  such  accumulated  evils;  how  forcibly  does  such  a 
state  remind  us  of  the  prodigal,  who,  from  being  clothed  in 
fine  apparel,  with  a ring  on  his  finger  and  shoes  on  his  feet, 
and  from  being  fed  with  the  choicest  viands,  when  he  left 
his  father's  house,  fell  step  by  step,  morally  and  physically, 
until  he  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with  the  husks  which 
the  swine  did  eat.  May  not  that  beautiful  parable  have  its 
literal  fulfilment  in  the  history  of  the  Maori.  In  it  we  may 
perhaps  behold  a race  who,  having  abandoned  the  service 
of  the  true  God,  and  cast  aside  his  word,  fell  step  by  step 
in  the  scale  of  civilization ; deprived  of  a fixed  home,  became 
nomade  wanderers  over  the  steppes  of  Asia,  and  gradually 
retreating  until  in  the  lapse  of  ages  they  reached  the  sea,  and 
thence,  still  preserving  their  wandering  character,  from 
island  to  island  driven  by  winds  and  currents,  and  various 
causes,  they  finally  reached  New  Zealand,  and  there  fallen 
to  their  lowest  state  of  degradation,  given  up  to  the  fiercest 
passions,  consumed,  and  being  consumed,  they  are  at  last 
enabled  to  reflect,  repent,  amend,  and  resolve  to  arise  and 
go  to  their  Father. 

Even  after  the  New  Zealand  race  had  sufficiently  increased 
to  colonize  the  two  islands,  there  was  no  bond  of  union 


8 


INTRODUCTION. 


amongst  them  ; split  into  innumerable  families  and  tribes, 
each  under  his  own  peculiar  head  and  independent  of  the 
rest,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered,  that  constant  feuds  should 
have  occurred,  and  the  fiercer  passions  should  have  been 
called  into  action.  Their  history  in  this  respect  is  only  a 
counterpart  of  that  of  the  Heptarchy,  when  one  petty  prince 
was  ever  warring  with  another ; or  with  that  state  which 
existed  to  a later  period,  amongst  the  Irish  and  the  High- 
landers of  Scotland,  almost  up  to  the  present  generation.  If 
even  the  traditions  which  remain  of  the  feuds  and  atrocities 
of  those  hostile  clans,  were  to  be  compared  with  the  Hew 
Zealander’s,  it  is  doubtful  which  would  be  thought  the  most 
savage. 

The  Tapu  was  a remarkable  institution;  it  did  not  ori- 
nate  with  the  Maori — he  brought  it  with  him ; it  was  of  wide- 
spread observance,  extending  from  Tonga  to  Tahaiti,  and 
thence  to  the  Sandwich  Isles.  Severe  and  bloody  as  were 
its  demands,  it  was  still,  as  Polynesian  society  was  constituted, 
politic  and  wise;  in  fact  it  was  the  only  bond  of  union  which 
existed,  and  kept  them  from  committing  greater  excesses. 
It  must  be  remembered  they  were  heathen — they  knew  not 
God,  and  great  as  their  sins  were,  they  were  not  against 
light  and  knowledge,  but  committed  with  darkened  under- 
standings. Compare  their  warfare,  as  heathen,  with  that  of 
civilized  Christians  ; the  sack  of  a town — whether  by  French 
or  English — and  then  what  shall  we  say  of  savage  warfare. 
Compare  the  war  which  the  misguided  patriots  of  Hew 
Zealand  carried  on  with  the  British  Governor  in  1845-7 
with  that  of  the  French  in  Algeria  during  the  same  period. 
The  sack  of  Kororareka,  with  the  destruction  of  an  Arab 
tribe.  The  conduct  of  Hone  Heke,  the  Hew  Zealand  chief, 
with  that  of  the  French  commander.  The  same  number  of 
the  Times  recorded  both.  Of  the  natives  it  said,  they  have 
hitherto  enjoyed  their  triumph  without  cruelty;”  in  fact,  the 
Governor  himself  lauded  the  chivalric  conduct  of  Heke. 
But  when  the  Oulad  Biahs,  a wild  mountain  tribe,  vainly 
endeavoured  to  preserve  their  independence  against  French 
aggression,  and  fled  with  their  wives  and  children  to  their 


INTRODUCTION. 


9 


caves,  and  were  completely  at  the  mercy  of  their  enemies, 
who  had  only  to  blockade  the  entrance  to  make  them 
submit  to  their  terms,  the  French  officer  commanded  his 
men  to  stop  it  up  with  combustible  materials,  and  then 
set  fire  to  them,  and  to  keep  those  fires  burning  the  whole 
of  the  night.  We  can  scarcely  imagine  anything  more 
horrible.  The  graphic  pen  of  a witness  has  recorded,  “ In 
the  morning  all  was  still ; the  soldiers  entered  the  caves,  and 
found  piles  of  men,  women,  and  children  at  the  breast,  with 
convulsed  features,  shewing  the  horrid  agonies  they  had 
endured,  and  in  that  state  no  feeling  of  remorse  or  pity 
was  felt,  but  the  soldiers  had  nerve  enough  to  plunder  the 
corpses  of  their  jewels ! ” At  one  fell  blow  from  800  to 
1,000  human  beings  thus  fearfully  perished  ! ! And  this 
too  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and,  as  the  eye  witness  of  this 
horrid  holocaust  states,  the  “perpetrators  belonged  to  a nation 
boasting  itself  pre-eminently  as  the  most  polite  and  civilized 
in  the  world and,  he  might  have  added,  professedly  Chris- 
tian. After  Kororareka  fell  into  Heke's  hands,  he  allowed 
the  inhabitants  to  re-enter  their  houses,  and  carry  off  their 
chief  valuables,  spared  the  churches  and  the  houses  of  the 
ministers ; and  when  the  battle  was  terminated,  he  was  not 
guilty  of  a single  act  of  cruelty,  but  showed  great  feeling  and 
forbearance ; though  from  mistaken  views  he  took  up  arms, 
he  did  not  forget,  that  he  was  a responsible  being.  Nor 
has  even  the  late  war  been  without  many  noble  traits,  which 
do  honour  to  our  adversaries,  but  to  which  it  is  foreign  to 
the  present  subject  further  to  allude. 

The  New  Zealanders  were  cannibals,  and  great  ones  too. 
Christian  light  and  knowledge  gradually  opened  their  eyes 
to  see  how  horrid  and  unnatural  the  custom  was,  and  in  1844 
the  last  known  act  of  cannibalism  took  place.  If  we  seek  to 
ascertain  ttye  origin  of  this  custom,  we  shall  doubtless  find  it 
in  want,  which  has  caused  even  our  own  countrymen,  when 
reduced  to  starvation,  to  have  recourse  to  the  same  dreadful 
expedient  for  preserving  life.*  New  Zealand  had  no  land 
animals,  and  their  constant  wars  often  destroyed  the  only 
* See  Cruise  of  the  Blonde , by  Lieut.  Dampier. 


10 


INTRODUCTION. 


crops  on  which  they  had  to  depend  for  winter  subsistance, 
the  consequence  was  frequent  famines ; to  such  straits  have 
they  been  reduced  that  there  are  traditions  of  men  kill- 
ing and  eating  even  their  own  wives  and  children ; can  we 
then  wonder  that  they  should  eat  the  bodies  of  those  slain 
in  fight.  Still  there  were  many  even  in  the  worst  times, 
who  entertained  almost  as  strong  a loathing  for  such  food  as 
we  do ; yet  when  most  debased  in  fcheir  social  relations, 
there  was  much  to  admire  : the  love  of  their  offspring  and 
relations,  who  were  more  closely  bound  together,  by  the 
mutual  tie  of  self-preservation ; their  good  feeling  and  kind- 
liness one  towards  another ; the  careful  avoiding  all  cause  of 
quarrels,  and  powerful  emotions  of  joy,  on  meeting  with  absent 
friends,  all  tell  in  their  favour,  and  prove  them  not  to  have 
been  wanting  in  natural  affection.  In  war  they  were  savages ; 
in  peace  they  were  not  deficient  in  many  of  the  kindlier 
feelings  belonging  to  our  nature.  In  war,  their  distorted 
features  made  them  resemble  fiends ; in  peace,  in  the  bosom 
of  their  families,  they  became  more  like  what  they  should  be 
and  have  been,  under  the  gentle  influence  of  the  Gospel. 
Naturally  a noble  race,  bodily  and  mentally  superior  to  most 
of  the  Polynesians,  their  fine  intelligent  countenances  present 
the  exterior  of  a fair-built  house,  which  only  requires  to  be 
suitably  furnished,  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  they  have 
already  passed  the  worst  part  of  that  transition  state,  which 
it  took  centuries  to  bring  our  own  country  through,  before 
it  attained  its  present  highly  advanced  position  in  the  scale 
of  nations. 

Though  fifteen  years  of  war  have  elapsed  since  the  above 
was  written,  the  author  does  not  retract  anything  here  ad- 
vanced, the  back-sliding  of  some  is  not  that  of  the  whole ; 
and  if  even  all  the  atrocities  reported  to  have  been  committed 
were  true — which  is  to  be  doubted — the  stigma  can  no  more 
justly  be  applied  to  the  entire  race,  than  the  enormities  which 
individuals  are  constantly  guilty  of  at  home,  can  brand  the 
nation  with  their  crimes,  and  prove  that  its  religion  as  well 
as  morality,  is  only  skin  deep,  as  has  been  stated  of  the 
Maori  race. 


INTRODUCTION. 


11 


However  gloomy  one  side  of  the  picture  may  be  represented, 
surely  there  is  some  bright  colouring  remaining  in  the  other, 
when  the  fact  is  patent  to  all  who  are  acquainted  with  New 
Zealand  affairs,  that  had  it  not  been  for  our  native  allies, 
the  present  state  of  the  colony  would  have  been  far  worse  than 
it  is.  Some  little  consideration  too,  must  be  given  to  many  of 
those,  who,  though  in  arms  against  us,  have  acted  with  a 
degree  of  moderation  which  does  them  honour.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  that  it  will  be  met  by  a corresponding  degree  on  our 
side,  which  will  lead  to  a permanent  good  understanding  and 
union  between  the  two  races. 


/ 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 

It  is  now  just  a century  since  that  celebrated  navigator, 
Captain  Cook,  revealed  to  the  nations  of  one  hemisphere 
those  who  were  occupying  the  larger  part  of  the  other. 
The  discovery  of  an  island  world,  inhabited  by  races  so 
long  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  human  family  as  to  be 
entirely  unknown,  is  not  without  advantage  to  civilized  man, 
presenting  a counterpart  of  the  state  his  remote  ancestors 
were  in,  and  enabling  him  to  regain  a page  of  his  own  early 
history. 

The  knowledge  of  their  language  and  literature,  if  such  it 
can  be  called,  their  religious  rites  and  ceremonies,  as  well 
as  social  state,  will  also  tend  to  throw  some  light  upon  the 
path  by  which  they  reached  their  present  abodes,  and  thus 
point  to  the  quarter  from  whence  they  originally  proceeded. 

The  general  idea  entertained  of  the  Maori  race  is,  that  it 
first  colonized  New  Zealand,  and  that  the  date  of  its  arrival 
there  was  quite  recent ; this  seems  to  be  borne  out  by  their 
own  traditions,  whilst,  however,  further  research  lengthens 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


13 


the  period  which  elapsed  since  their  arrival,  it  tends  also  to 
establish  the  fact  that  it  was  not  the  brown,  but  the  black, 
who  first  peopled  those  islands,  as  well  as  the  entire  southern 
hemisphere. 

The  Melanesian  preceded  the  Polynesian,  and  remnants  of 
that  more  ancient  race  are  to  be  found  widely  dispersed 
throughout  Australia,  Polynesia,  and  the  Indian  Isles  ; more 
nearly  allied  to  the  African  than  the  Asiatic  in  color  and 
feature,  inferior  to  the  Maori  in  stature  and  intellect,  and 
occupying  a lower  grade  in  the  scale  of  civilization. 

The  remains  of  this  race  are  to  be  seen  in  every  part  of 
New  Zealand,  especially  among  the  Nga-ti-ka-hunu,  to  which 
the  derisive  name  of  Pokerekahu — Black  Kumara — is  applied.* 

The  Maori  traditions  preserve  both  the  names  of  the 
canoes  which  brought  them  to  New  Zealand,  as  well  as  of 
the  chiefs  who  commanded  them ; several  of  these  records 
make  mention  of  their  having  found  this  black  race  in 
occupation  of  the  country  on  their  arrival. f 

* The  author  was  once  travelling  m the  interior  with  a negro  in  his  party. 
On  entering  a village,  one  of  those  dark  chocolate  coloured  natives  came  to 
welcome  him  ; on  his  perceiving  the  negro,  he  ran  and  threw  his  arms  round 
his  neck,  embracing  him,  and  saying,  that  “now  at  last  he  had  found  his 
brother,”  a claim  of  relationship  that  the  negro  did  not  seem  at  all  disposed  to 
allow. 


f The  following  is  the  pedigree  of  Rawinia  Rere,  wife  of  Hoani  Wiremu 
Hipango,  from  Turi,  the  first  man  who  settled  on  the  west  coast  when  he 
arrived  from  Hawaiki  in  the  Aotea  : — 


I. 

Turi  and  Rongorongo. 

18. 

Maruaia. 

2. 

Turanga  i mua. 

19. 

Ko  Rake  Kohera. 

3- 

Tamatea. 

20. 

Ko  te  Koratu. 

4- 

Ko  Hikuao. 

21. 

Ko  te  Aomakiri. 

5- 

Ko  Haereao. 

22. 

Ko  Tautope. 

6. 

Ko  te  Ihi. 

23- 

Ko  Taipu. 

7- 

Ko  te  Mana. 

24. 

Ko  Kaia. 

8. 

Ko  te  Tapu. 

25- 

1.  Ko  Rangi.  2.  Hoani  Rawen- 

9- 

Ko  te  Marutuna. 

ata-matao.  3.  Ko  Keo.  4. 

IO. 

Ko  te  Maruwehi. 

Ko  te  Herepu. 

ii. 

Ko  te  Maruaitu. 

1.  Weta  Kuini  Kahu-Waere- 

12. 

Ko  te  Maruariki. 

rewa. 

13- 

Ko  te  Hikorangi. 

26. 

2.  Rawinia  Rere  mar  : to  Hoani 

14. 

Ratua  0 te  Rangi. 

W.  Hipango. 

IS- 

Rangi-tau  mai  waho. 

27. 

1.  Hori  K.  Hipango.  2.  Wata 

16. 

Rangi  paki  iwi. 

I.  Hipango. 

i7- 

Rangi  hikaka. 

14 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


The  tradition  of  Manaia,  chief  of  the  Tokomaru,  one  of 
the  original  canoes,  expressly  states,  that  when  he  reached 
the  Waitara  River,  he  found  the  country  there  occupied  by 
a strange  race,  who,  unskilled  in  war,  were  easily  overcome ; 
many  being  killed,  some  escaped,  the  rest  reduced  to  slavery, 
and  finally  became  incorporated  with  the  tribe  of  their  con- 
querors.* 

The  same  is  recorded  in  the  tradition  of  Turi,  the  first  of 
the  Polynesian  race  who  settled  on  the  west  coast  of  the  North 
Island;  he  planted  the  kumara  and  karaka,  which  he  had 
brought  with  him  from  Hawaiki.  At  Patea  he  had  his  first 
inara,  or  farm,  there  built  his  house,  and  formed  his  little 
settlement ; he  had  his  spring,  of  which  is  preserved  the 
proverb,  Ka  rite  te  wai  nei  hi  wai  Kimihia — the  water  is 
good,  like  that  of  Kimihia,  in  Hawaiki.  The  names  of  all 
these  are  still  preserved,  and  the  spot  is  still  venerated  by 
his  descendants.  Turi  likewise  found  inhabitants  at  Patea 
on  his  arrival,  whom  he  slew,  and  took  possession  of  their 
abodes.f 

Some  portion  of  that  aboriginal  race  may  have  long  survived 
in  the  northern  island,  and  maintained  their  independence 
amongst  the  mountain  ranges,  where  they  are  remembered 

* “ A ka  tae  ki  Rohutu,  ki  te  kongutu  awa  o Waitara,  ka  noho  ratou  i reira, 
— na,  he  tangata  ano  i reira,  Ko  nga  tangata  whenua  ake  ano  o tenei  motu* 
otira  ka  patua,  ratou  e Manaia  ma,  ka  mate,  ka  riro  te  kainga  i a Manaia.  ratou 
ko  ana  tama,  me  tona  iwi,  ko  ana  tangata  i patua  ai  e Manaia  ma,  kia  riro  ai 
te  kainga  i a ratou. 

“When  he  arrived  at  Rohutu,  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  Waitara,  he 
stopped  there,  and  behold  there  were  people,  even  the  ancient  inhabitants  of 
the  island  ; but  Manaia  and  his  followers  slew  them,  they  were  killed,  and 
Manaia  possessed  their  abode,  he,  his  sons,  and  people,  of  those  men  that 
Manaia  and  his  followers  slew,  that  the  place  might  be  theirs.” — The  tradition 
of  Manaia  coming  froin  Hawaiki  to  New  Zealand . Sir  G.  Grey. 

•f  When  Turi  landed  first  at  Patea,  the  tradition  states  that  he  killed  the 
ancient  inhabitants  of  that  part.  “ Ka  eke  mai  ka  noho  i Patea,  ka  patu  i o 
reira  tangata.” — “He  went  on  shore  and  dwelt  at  Patea,  and  slew  the  inha- 
bitants thereof.  ” There  is  a curious  old  proverb  which  seems  to  bear  on  this 
subject — “ He  pokeke  Uenguku  i tu  ai,  he  tapu  tamaka  i tauai,  ko  wero  analce 
e kore  e tika,  erangi  Ko  wero,  Ko  pango,  Ka  tika.” — The  rainbow,  beautiful 
as  it  is,  depends  upon  the  dark  cloud  to  make  it  conspicuous,  so  the  glory  of 
the  red  chief  would  not  be  seen  were  it  not  for  ^is  black  followers. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


15 


as  the  Maero  and  Mohocto,  or  wild  man  of  the  woods ; they 
are  said  even  yet  to  exist  on  the  Tararna  mountains  ; if  a 
curl  of  smoke  should  be  seen  upon  them,  it  is  commonly 
attributed  to  the  Maero.  This,  however,  is  to  be  regarded 
as  an  evidence  of  their  past,  rather  than  present  existence. 

The  Nga-ti-rua-nui,  many  years  ago,  stated  that  some  of 
their  tribe  were  once  in  the  forests  which  cover  the  sides  of 
Mount  Taranaki,  now  called  Egmont,  spearing  birds,  and 
ascending  higher  than  usual  they  came  to  a large  tree,  at  the 
base  of  which  were  signs  of  man  having  been  there ; won- 
dering from  whence  they  could  come,  they  looked  up,  and 
perceived  a platform  amongst  the  branches^  climbing  up  to 
it,  they  found  a house,  in  which  were  several  men,  women, 
and  children,  who,  as  a matter  of  course,  were  soon  killed 
and  cooked. 

It  is  singular  that  the  Australians  likewise  imagine  there 
are  men  still  wilder  and  more  degraded  than  themselves 
living  in  their  forests,  of  whom  they  have  the  greatest  fear.* 

Portions  of  the  Melanesian  race  have  recently  been  found 
in  some  of  the  islands,  living  in  tree-houses.  Bishop  Patteson 
states,  that  in  one  of  the  islands  which  he  visited,  he  found 
a tribe  living  in  lofty  trees,  the  ascent  to  which  appeared 
very  difficult,  and  expressed  his  surprise  at  the  facility  with 
which  the  natives  went  along  trunks  of  trees  in  inclined 
positions  as  ways  of  communication. f 

* “The  natives  of  Sumatra  suppose  man  to  have  originated  with  the  Orang 
Outang,  such  as  the  fabulous  Orang  Gugu  and  Orang  Cubu  ; these  are  dreaded 
as  most  savage  and  violent  creatures  ; it  seems  possible  that  the  Maori  and 
Australians  derived  their  ideas  of  wild  men  thence,  and  that  this  is  a proof  of 
common  ancestry.” — Latham's  Natural  History  of  the  Varieties  of  Man,  175. 

Some  of  the  natives  in  South  Eastern  Africa  believe  that  the  souls  of  their 
ancestors  return  in  the  form  of  monkeys.  The  Australians  think  they  become 
white  men.  The  connection  of  men  with  monkeys  is  also  entertained  in 
Western  India,  where  they  advance  a step  still  further,  and  give  the  order  in 
which  different  nations  have  been  changed  from  one  into  the  other. 

t The  following  interesting  account  is  extracted  from  a journal  of  ‘The 
Southern  Cross  ’ schooner,  1866  : — “ The  Bishop  (Patteson)  slept  on  shore  last 
night  at  one  place,  which  he  describes  as  a most  extraordinary  habitation.  A 
site  for  the  village  has  been  chosen  on  a hill  surmounted  by  steep,  almost  per- 
pendicular coral  rocks  ; the  forest  has  been  cleared  for  some  space  all  round, 
so  as  to  prevent  any  enemy  from  approaching  unperceived  ; there  is  a wall  of 


16 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


It  is  highly  probable  that  the  ancient  black  race  not  only 
dwelt  in  tree- houses,  but  likewise  in  lake-houses,  for  safety. 
Yfhen  the  author  first  visited  the  Horo  Whenua  Lake,  he 
was  much  struck  with  the  picturesque  appearance  of  a 
number  of  food  stores  constructed  on  poles  in  the  water,  the 
remnants,  perhaps,  of  more  extensive  buildings,  which  in 
ancient  times  were  used  as  places  of  refuge  and  permanent 
habitations  by  the  Moa  Upoko,  to  prevent  surprise ; but 
when  that  tribe  was  entirely  destroyed  by  Te  Rauparaha, 
those  lake-houses  disappeared  as  well  as  their  owners,  and 
now  the  food  stores  have  likewise  passed  away.  Lake-houses 
are  still  to  be  seen  in  Borneo  and  Papua. 

Though  numerous  traces  of  this  race  are  to  be  seen 
amongst  the  Maori,  they  are  not  to  be  found  now  in  a 

stones  of  considerable  height  on  that  side  of  the  village  where  the  rock  is  less 
precipitous,  with  one  narrow  entrance,  approached  only  by  a smooth  slippery 
trank  of  a tree,  laid  at  a somewhat  steep  inclination  over  a hollow  below ; but 
the  tree-houses,  with  which  we  made  acquaintance  of  old  at  this  island,  are  at- 
this  place  on  a scale  almost  incredible.  Tall  trees  rising  out  of  the  steep, 
slippery  sides  of  the  hill,  are  chosen  for  these  great  bamboo  nests,  of  which 
there  are  six  at  this  one  village.  From  the  wall  of  the  fort,  for  so  the  village 
may  be  fairly  called,  or  from  the  base,  ladders  are  carried  up  to  these  tree- 
houses.  It  is  surprising  to  see  men,  women,  and  children,  passing  up  and 
down  these  ladders.  The  Bishop  confessed  that  he  was  afraid  to  make  the 
attempt  in  the  dark  of  the  evening.  It  was  his  intention  to  sleep  in  one  of 
these  curious  houses,  but  he  says  that  he  had  no  idea  of  their  real  character  at 
this  particular  place.  A day  or  two  afterwards,  however,  he  went  up  into  the 
highest  tree-house,  and,  with  Mr.  Atkin,  made  careful  measurements.  The 
house  in  which  the  people  wished  him  to  sleep,  is  built  on  the  top  of  a tree, 
which  rises  up  from  the  hollow  before  mentioned,  near  the  fort.  The  top  of 
the  stone  wall  is  on  a level  with  the  trunk,  at  a height  of  thirty-four  feet  from 
the  ground.  The  ladder  reaching  from  the  fort  to  the  tree-house  had  forty-two 
rowels,  at  an  average  distance  of  eighteen  inches  from  one  to  the  other.  The 
whole  height  of  the  house  from  the  ground  is  ninety-four  feet  ; its  length  is 
eighteen  feet ; breadth  ten  feet ; height  eight  feet  ; — all  being  inside  measure- 
ment. Some  of  the  trees  were  at  a much  greater  distance  from  the  fort,  and 
the  ladders  at  a proportionately  greater  angle.  One  woman,  carrying  a load, 
walked  up  one  of  these  ladders  without  touching  anything  with  her  hand,  with 
no  balancing  pole,  after  the  fashion  of  our  civilized  performers  ; and  without 
exciting  the  least  remark  or  notice  from  the  people  standing  about.  On  the 
naked  branches  of  these  trees  one  man  was  walking  about,  hanging  out  his  net, 
without  grasping  anything  with  his  hand,  when  one  slip  would  have  sent  him 
down  on  to  stones  and  stumps  of  trees  ninety  or  one  hundred  feet  below. 
Accustomed  from  childhood  to  these  feats,  they  were  wholly  unconscious  of  any 


Food  stores  in  horowhenua  lake. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


17 


separate  state  in  the  Northern  Island,  it  is  in  the  middle  one, 
Te  wai  pounamu,  that  the  remains  of  this  ancient  people 
are  yet  to  be  discovered  amidst  the  natural  fastnesses  of  the 
southern  Alps,  where  they  are  known  as  the  Nga-ti-ma-moe. 
In  former  years,  such  was  the  dread  which  this  degraded 
race  had  of  the  fierce  Maori,  that  immediately  they  saw  any 
of  them  they  fled;  occasionally,  however,  they  were  surprised, 
and  either  eaten,  or  kept  as  slaves.  The  Nga-ti-ma-moe  do 
not  appear  to  have  cultivated  the  ground,  but  to  have  derived 
their  substance  from  snaring,  birds,  and  fishing,  as  well  as 
from  such  indigenous  fruits  and  roots  as  the  country  produced. 
Since  the  introduction  of  Christianity,  probably  much  of 
their  fear  of  the  Maori  has  disappeared,  and  the  two  races 
have  become  more  or  less  intermingled,  especially  as 
the  number  of  the  latter  on  the  western  coast  has  become 
greatly  diminished,  and  cannot  be  much  in  excess  of  the 

danger,  or  indifferent  to  it.  No  accident  occurred  whilst  they  were  making 
their  houses,  though  to  us  it  seemed  an  almost  impossible  undertaking  to 
accomplish  without  the  help  of  wings. 

All  this  has  been  rendered  necessary  by  their  continued  quarrels.  They  never 
heard  of  any  other  mode  of  living.  Insecurity  of  life  and  property  causes  no 
questioning  and  little  uneasiness  ; it  is  simply  the  necessary  condition  of  human 
life.  They  fear  no  attack  when  once  safely  lodged  in  their  houses  in  the  clouds. 
They  say  that  no  one  would  dare  to  attempt  to  burn  or  cut  down  the  tree,  for 
they  keep  a large  stock  of  stones  and  spears  aloft,  and  say  that  they  could  crush 
any  men  who  attempted  to  come  near  the  tree.  There  is  a stage  outside  the 
house,  and  a trap-door  in  the  bamboo  flooring,  from  which  they  drop  heavy 
stones,  and  no  doubt  the  fighting  men  run  about  on  the  branches,  and  throw 
their  spears  as  fearlessly  and  securely  as  if  they  had  a footing  on  firm  ground.  ” 
— Journal  of  the  Mission  Voyage  to  the  Melanesian  Islands  in  ‘ Southern  Cross 
1866,  page  10. 

The  Author  has  observed  the  same  amongst  the  Maori,  who,  from  not  wear- 
ing shoes,  seem  to  have  as  much  use  of  the  toes  as  of  the  fingers  and  thumbs. 
On  a rainy  day,  having  to  pass  over  a deep  chasm  by  a single  slippery  trunk, 
he  was  going  to  make  the  attempt  by  getting  astride  of  it,  but  a native  offered 
to  carry  him  over  on  his.  back  ; the  offer  was  accepted,  he  walked  over  it  just 
as  firmly  as  on  the  ordinary  road.  Not  wearing  shoes  enables  the  person 
to  use  the  toes  much  the  same  as  the  fingers  ; in  passing  over  Taupo  Lake, 
when  the  water  was  like  a mirror,  one  of  the  natives  saw  a pipe  at  the  bottom 
at  a great  depth,  he  immediately  jumped  over,  dived  down,  and  brought  up  the 
bowl  of  a pipe  between  his  toes.  This  use  of  the  toes  must  not  be  supposed  to 
indicate  any  simian  approximation  ; the  author  has  found  it  far  safer  to  descend 
precipices  without  shoes  than  with  them.  The  Hill  Araans  in  Travancore  like- 
wise live  in  trees  ; their  villages  are  described  as  being  highly  picturesque. 

C 


18 


THE  TWO  PACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


Nga-ti-ma-moe,  their  fear  now  being  in  some  measure  trans- 
ferred to  the  Europeans  straggling  about  the  mountains  in 
search  of  gold;  some  parties  of  whom  have  occasionally 
surprised  them,  and  plundered  their  abodes. 

The  Ware  Kauri,  or  Chatham  Isles,  were  up  to  a very  late 
date  entirely  inhabited  by  a portion  of  this  dark  race,  until 
the  Maori  found  his  way  there  by  the  aid  of  whalers  and 
subjected  them  to  his  rule,  destroying  many  of  them,  some, 
however,  still  survive ; they  are  greatly  reduced  in  number, 
and  probably  do  not  amount  to  a hundred ; they  are  called 
Moriori,  but  are  more  generally  known  as  the  Kiri  waka 
papa,  or  bare  sides,  also  by  the  term  of  Paraki  war  a,  a 
corruption  of  the  English  word,  black  fellow.  Formerly 
they  went  naked,  and  their  houses,  if  such  they  could  be 
called,  were  only  made  by  a few  poles  reared  together 
over  a circular  pit,  two  or  three  feet  deep,  covered  in  with 
sods,  thus  forming  a cone-shaped  hut,  with  a very  small 
hole  on  the  north  side,  just  large  enough  for  a man  to  creep 
in,  which  was  closed  by  a bundle  of  sedge  or  other  substance, 
probably,  this  was  the  simplest  form  of  human  habitation  we 
are  acquainted  with,  unless  it  be  the  Gunyeh,*  which  is  merely 
a screen  formed  of  a few  sheets  of  bark,  to  afford  shelter 
from  cold  winds  or  rain ; in  those  miserable  holes  they  sat 
huddled  together,  with  their  children  between  their  knees, 
for  warmth. 

It  is,  however,  remarkable  that  such  a degraded  race  could 
make  canoes  in  a most  ingenious  way  from  the  Rimu,  a 
sea-weed  with  large  flat  leaves,  which  were  converted  into 
tubes,  by  making  a small  orifice  through  the  outer  skin 
of  one  side,  and  then  inflating  the  intervening  space, 
and  stopping  up  the  opening ; they  thus  became  large  air 

* The  Australians  have  the  same  word  for  a cave,  which  is  used  for  a 
house  ; in  fact,  caves  are  occasionally  occupied  as  houses  throughout  New 
Zealand,  and  would  be  more  generally  so,  were  it  not  for  fear  of  the  frequent 
earthquakes.  The  Maori  traditions  of  their  greatest  enemies  or  Taniwa, 
represent  them  as  living  in  holes  underground,  in  fact  make  them  to  have  been 
troglodytes,  and  this  seems  to  have  been  a characteristic  feature  of  the  black 
race,  and  like  them,  the  Maori  thought  their  gods  appeared  as  spiders,  flies, 
moths  and  beetles. 


A NATIVE  CROSSING  A RIVER  ON  A MOKI,  OR  BULRUSH  RAFT.. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


19 


tubes,  and  when  dry  retained  their  shape,  becoming  hard 
and  buoyant;  a light  frame  in  the  form  of  a canoe,  with  a 
double  keel,  was  made  of  flax  stalks ; the  air  tubes  were 
lashed  to  the  sides  of  the  frame,  and  the  interstices  filled 
up  with  moss,  so  that  the  whole  was  rendered  tolerably 
water  tight,  and  so  buoyant  as  to  be  unable  to  sink ; in  fact  it 
was  a life  boat. 

These  tubes  were  also  used  as  jars  or  receptacles  for  water, 
oil,  potted  birds,  &c.,  for  winter  use ; in  fact,  they  supplied 
the  place  of  pottery,  and  were  to  the  poor  Moriori,  what  the 
bamboo  is  to  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  tropics.* 

That  there  has  been  a portion  of  the  human  family  in  New 
Zealand  in  remote  times,  appears  to  be  highly  probable,  from 
the  fact  of  bones  having  been  discovered  in  the  turbaries  of 
the  Molineaux  River,  along  with  those  of  the  dog  and  moa  ; 
and  that  deposit  has  every  appearance  of  being  anterior  to 
the  arrival  of  the  Polynesian  race  in  these  islands,  conse- 
quently the  natural  conclusion  will  be,  that  such  remains 
belong  to  the  black  or  most  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  land. 

The  black  race  differs  from  the  lighter,  not  only  by  its 
inferiority  in  the  ordinary  arts  of  life,  but  likewise  in  religion  ; 
theirs  was  of  quite  a different  character  to  that  of  the  Poly- 
nesian, and  had  a greater  affinity  to  the  African  than  to  the 

* Similar  circumstances  seem  to  have  called  forth  like  expedients  amongst  the 
uncultivated  sections  of  the  human  race.  Hill  in  his  travels  in  Peru,  states,  ‘ ‘ that 
the  Peruvian  canoes  consist  of  inflated  cellular  masses  formed  of  seal  skins, 
distended  by  twigs,  two  of  them  are  lashed  together,  and  the  paddlers  sit  on 
a frame  between  them.”  The  Africans  of  Abbeokuta  take  the  calabash  ; the 
Hindus  use  large  jars,  so  also  the  Chinese ; on  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris, 
inflated  skins  answer  the  same  purpose  ; in  fact,  what  was  most  easily  obtained 
was  rendered  available  for  their  necessities. 

Of  this  character  was  the  coracle  of  the  ancient  Britons,  which,  from  its 
simple  construction  and  lightness,  being  merely  a wicker  basket  qovered  with 
cow’s  skin,  has  proved  so  serviceable  that  it  still  continues  to  be  used. 

The  Maori  Mold  is,  perhaps,  the  simplest  of  all  these  enumerated,  being 
merely  a bundle  of  raupo  or  bulrush  leaves  bound  together  with  flax,  in  the 
form  of  a canoe  ; it  is  so  buoyant  that  a person  sitting  astride  it,  can  easily 
paddle  himself  across  the  broadest  river  ; the  writer  has  been  obliged  to  have 
recourse  to  it,  and  found  it  answered  admirably. — (See  Isa.  xviii.  2.)  The 
Catamaran  is  formed  by  merely  lashing  half-a-dozen  poles  to  a couple  of  cross 
bars. 


20 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


Asiatic.  They  had  the  Fetish  tree,  and  their  sacred  rocks 
to  which  offerings  were  made.*  Remnants  of  snake  worship 
are  also  to  be  traced,  although  there  are  no  such  reptiles  in 
New  Zealand,  yet  they  have  innumerable  traditions  of 
immense  Saurians  or  Ngarara,  and  Taniwa,  fabulous  fresh 
water  and  marine  monsters.  They  also  paid  a sort  of 
worship  to  an  enormous  kind  of  eel,  the  Ruahine,  to  such 
offerings  were  made,  by  which,  in  process  of  time,  they  were 
rendered  quite  tame.f  This  reverence  however  did  not  save 
those  divinities  from  the  oven  in  times  of  scarcity. 

All  the  religious  ceremonies  of  the  Australian  natives  were 
celebrated  by  night  in  the  forest,  a kind  of  acknowledgment 
of  the  powers  of  darkness.  The  writer  is  not  aware  that  this 

* Sacred  trees  as  well  as  stones  are  common  on  the  east  coast  of  New 
Zealand.  In  the  Bay  of  Plenty,  they  are  generally  to  be  discerned  by  being 
painted  red  or  bound  round  with  garments,  or  having  rags,  &c.,  suspended 
from  their  branches  ; these  are  a kind  of  memorial  monument  to  a Chief, 
and  every  friend  who  passes  by  suspends  a rag  or  garment  ; often  times  they 
are  so  adorned  with  ornaments  as  to  present  a singular  appearance. 

On  sacred  stones  or  rocks  it  was  customary  to  offer  the  liver  or  entrails  of 
enemies  slain  in  battle. 

In  India.,  sacred  trees  are  common,  as  well  as  posts  and  stones.  The  Deodar, 
Given  to  God,  the  tree  of  Siva  or  Deva  is  planted  near  their  temples,  as  also  the 
Banyan,  and  the  Buddists  have  the  Pippul  or  Bo  tree.  The  Brahmins  have 
the  Kalpa  tree  in  Paradise.  This  seems  to  be  a custom  as  old  as  Adam,  and  to 
have  prevailed  in  every  age  and  clime. — (Gen.  iii.  24.  II.  Kings  xxiii.  7. 
Hosea  iv.  13.)  Herodotus  and  Elean  relate  that  Xerxes  in  his  important 
expedition  against  Greece  tarried  a whole  day  in ' the  desert  of  Lydia,  to  pay 
homage  to  a large  plane  tree,  on  the  branches  of  which  he  hung  rich  garments, 
bracelets,  and  other  precious  ornaments,  and  the  next  day  proceeding  on  his 
march  he  left  a soldier  to  guard  the  honored  tree.  — Ouseley's  Travels  in  the  East. 

f “Bishop  Crowther  has  recently  sent  to  England  an  account  of  a visit  to 
Bonny,  near  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Niger.  He  commenced  the  mission  in 
January,  1866,  at  the  request  of  the  king  and  chiefs.  The  fruits  already  appear 
in  the  partial  abandonment  of  idolatry.  The  Bishop  says  that  as  the  entire  de- 
struction of  iguanas  (reptiles  which  have  been  worshipped)  the  previous  year 
had  not  been  attended  with  any  revengeful  visitation  from  the  gods,  the  people 
were  prepared,  for  further  reformation.  Accordingly,  when  asked  for  a part  of 
a sacred  grove  in  order  to  open  up  a road  between  the  town  and  Mission  Station, 
the  chiefs  at  once  granted  it.  This  so-called  sacred  grove  was  found  full  of 
snakes,  bees,  and  human  bones,  the  evidence  of  deeds  of  darkness.  Many  of 
these  bones  were  the  bones  of  twin  children  who,  according  to  the  custom  of 
the  country,  are  always  thrown,  immediately  upon  their  birth,  into  some  sacred 
grove.” — Visit  of  the  Bishop  of  the  Niger  to  Bonny. 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


21 


was  the  case  with  those  of  New  Zealand,  "but  in  one  grand 
respect  did  the  Melanesian  differ  from  the  Polynesian,  whilst 
the  latter  possesses  many  traditions  referring  to  some  of  the 
grand  events  recorded  in  Scripture — the  Fall,  the  Flood,  the 
Dispersion,  and  the  Temple — the  Melanesians  appear  to  be 
totally  ignorant  of  them  all,  hence  it  is  to  be  inferred  that 
they  were  inhabitants  of  the  southern  hemisphere  long 
anterior  to  the  Polynesian,  who,  however  long  it  may  have 
been  since  they  quitted  their  primal  abode,  did  not  do  so 
until  a period  posterior  to  all  those  events,  and  that  they 
must  have  sprung  from  a race  intimately  acquainted  with 
Scripture  history,  which  was  unknown  to  the  other. 

The  remarks  here  made  of  the  Melanesian  race  apply  to 
them  generally  wherever  they  are  found  in  the  Southern  he- 
misphere, and  perhaps  there  is  nothing  more  extraordinary 
than  their  wide  dispersion  therein,  at  some  very  remote 
period  of  man’s  history.  In  India  they  ruled  long  before 
the  arrival  of  the  Hindu,  and  are  still  to  be  found  amongst 
the  hills  and  jungle,  preserving  their  peculiar  language  and 
religion  ; * however  remote  the  origin  of  the  Chinese  may 
be,  they  acknowledge  the  existence  of  a far  more  ancient 
race  living  amongst  them,  who  are  regarded  as  the  true 
Aborigines  of  the  land,  and  styled  the  children  of  the  soil, 
as  old  as  its  flowers  and  grass,  f 

In  the  Island  of  Formosa  there  is  an  aboriginal  race.  Mr. 
White,  Commissioner  of  customs  at  Takow,  Formosa,  sends 

* In  Ceylon  there  is  a race  called  the  Weddahs,  which  is  quite  distinct  from 
the  Cingalese,  and  considered  as  the  remnant  of  the  original  inhabitants  of  the 
island. 

f ‘ ‘ It  appears  singular  that  ancient  as  the  Chinese  are  acknowledged  to  be  as  a 
people,  there  are  still  the  remains  of  a far  more*  ancient  race  living  amongst 
them,  and  who  are  regarded  by  the  Chinese  themselves  as  the  true  aboriginal 
inhabitants  who  call  them  Miau-Tze,  or  children  of  the  soil,  as  well  as  the 
flowers  and  grass  which  peculiarly  belong  to  it.  They  are  divided  into  eighty- 
two  tribes,  subsist  on  wild  fruits,  fish,  and  the  flesh  of  wild  animals.  They 
usually  go  about  bare  footed,  are  very  scantily  clad,  lead  a life  full  of  privation 
and  hardship,  and  invoke  evil  spirits  as  in  days  long  gone  by,  so  up  to  the 
present  time.  The  Miau-Tze  are  restless  and  troublesome  neighbours  to  the 
Chinese.” — Voyage  of  the  Novara,  vol.  2,  p.  460. 

Mr.  Medhurst  also  speaks  of  the  same  Meaoutze  in  the  province  of  Kwangse: 
“The  country  about  Lo-nguong  is  remarkable  for  the  existence  of  a great  number 


22 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


in  his  Report  of  1867  some  account  of  the  savages  of  that 
island.  This  aboriginal  race  is  now  of  two  classes,  the  sub- 
dued and  the  unsubdued,  the  latter  having  intermarried 
with  the  Chinese  and  adopted  their  habits  and  customs,  but 
preserving  their  own  language,  are  made  the  medium  of 
communication  with  the  unsubdued  inhabitants  of  the  hill 
country,  about  forty-five  miles  north-east  of  Takow.  Once 
every  eight  days  these  savages  and  the  Chinese,  accompanied 
by  some  of  the  half-castes  as  interpreters,  resort  to  a stated 
place  on  the  border,  where  the  Chinese  barter  iron  and  salt 
against  dye,  rice,  superior  to  any  other  grown  on  the  island, 
hemp,  tobacco,  and  sweet  potatoes.  No  Chinese  ever  ven- 
tures alone  into  the  interior,  and  no  savage  crosses  the  border; 
in  both  cases  death  would  follow  detection.  Foreigners, 
however,  are  received  in  the  interior  with  friendliness  and 
hospitality.  The  unsubdued  savages  are  described  as  well- 
knit,  agile  men,  with  dark  complexions,  delicate  features, 
and  black  hair  and  eyes,  the  latter,  unlike  those  of  the 
Chinese,  being  large  and  round.  Every  household  is  well 
supplied  with  bows,  arrows,  and  muskets,  and  the  face  of  the 
country  is  so  bold  and  precipitous  that  they  need  no  walls  or 
fortifications  as  a defence  against  invasion. 

Borneo  is  also  peopled  by  two  races,  and  even  those  are 
stated  to  have  been  preceded  by  a more  ancient  black  one. 

With  New  Guinea  and  the  numerous  adjacent  isles  so 
little  intercourse  has  taken  place,  that  nothing  certain  can 
be  said  of  its  inhabitants,  except  that  they  appear  to  be  of 
the  Melanesian  race ; but  in  New  Caledonia,  and  many  of 
the  islands  to  the  east  and  north,  the  same  race  abounds. 

of  the  ancient  aborigines  of  the  country,  whom  the  Chinese  call  the  barbarians 
of  the  inner  hills  ; their  women  retain  their  ancient  head-dress,  a curious  relic 
of  antiquity  ; and  whilst  in  their  intercourse  with  the  Chinese  they  speak  their 
language  amongst  themselves,  they  have  their  own  which  no  Chinese  man  can 
understand.  There  are  only  three  surnames  amongst  them,  at  least  as  they  are 
known  here.  They  never  intermarry  with  the  Chinese,  and  keep  their  own 
customs.  The  Chinese  say  they  have  no  religion,  and  live  like  beasts,  and  are 
entirely  devoted  to  the  hills  and  tilling  the  barren  parts  of  the  country.  Their 
having  no  religion  must  be  a mistake,  as  they  have  idols  which  they  worship, 
as  I was  informed  by  one  of  themselves.  They  are  a much  more  hardy  race 
than  the  Chinese  amongst  whom  they  dwell.” — Rev.  J.  R.  Wolfe. 


NEW  ZEALAND  FAUNA  & FLORA  OF  PAST 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


23 


This  ancient  section  of  the  human  family  appears  to  have 
originally  proceeded  from  the  west,  and  gradually  worked 
its  way  fhence  through  continental  Asia,  as  well  as  the  islands 
to  the  south  of  it ; its  starting  point  could  only  have  been 
Africa.  It*  is  also  observable  that  there  are  some  traces 
of  its  African  origin  remaining,  independent  of  religion ; 
the  remarkable  similarity,  or  rather  identity,  of  many  of 
the  Maori  words  with  those  of  Ancient  Egypt,  prove 
either  unity  of  race  or  of  place  whence  those  words  were 
derived.* 


* Egyptian  gods  with  Maori  names,  copied  from  those  written  on  their 
images  in  the  British  Museum.  Deciphered  hieroglyphics  : — 

MAORI  SIGNIFICATION. 

White,  clear,  bright. 


Ma,  God  of  Truth  ----- 

Hora}TheSun 

Pai  - - - - - - - - 

Kai  (Keres,  Ceres) 

Man,  or  Maui 

Hapai 

Hape  ---  - 

Heka 

Au 

Hepi  - - - - 

Hapi,  god  of  the  Nile  - - - - 

Names  of  men  and  women  : — 

Kaha,  a judge 

Rui,  represented  holding  an  ear  of 

corn  in  her  hand 

Hui,  a judge 

Mahu 

Haru 

A tu 

Hara 

Pai  ri  - - 

Hanata 

Mene  - 

Ki 

Taia 

Ata 

Te  mua  - - - 

Mau 

Apu  - - 


( Idem. 

( Ora,  life. 

Good. 

Food,  abundance,  plenty. 

The  New  Zealand  great  god  (meu,  or 
meui)  with  a solar  disk  on  his  head. 
To  lift  up  (a  suitable  name  for  a powerful 
god). 

Crooked  (ditto  for  an  evil  god). 
Decayed,  mould. 

A rapid. 

Concealed. 

To  open. 

Strong. 

To  sow,  scatter  as  seed. 

To  assemble  men  together. 

To  heal. 

To  blacken. 

To  stand  apart. 

Sin. 

Good  hand. 

Scorched. 

To  assemble. 

To  fill. 

To  be  able. 

The  morning. 

The  elder,  the  first. 

To  wait,  patience. 

To  sit  or  squat. 


24 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


A larger  list  of  Maori  words  might  have  been  given ; these 
are  sufficient  to  show  a remarkable  connection  of  Maori  with 
the  ancient  language  of  Egypt.  Further,  the  ancient  Egyp- 
tian adze,  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  is  identical 
with  the  Toki  of  New  Zealand,  not  only  in  form,  but 
also  in  the  manner  of  tying  on  the  stone  to  the  handle,  and 
likewise  with  the  cinet  with  which  it  is  bound.  Another 
singular  implement  of  husbandry,  the  Tima,  still  used  as  a 
hoe  in  New  Zealand,  is  identical  in  form  with  that  of  ancient 
Egypt.  The  boomerang  of  Australia  is  also  of  Egyptian 
origin.  The  word  Thibet,  ark  or  coffer,  is  similar  to  that  of 
Kumete,  a large  wooden  bowl.  Amenti,  a cave  in  Hades, 
according  to  Egyptian  mythology,  is  the  same  with  Ameto  in 
the  Maori  mythology.  Painting  the  body  rec||  seems  to  have 
been  a general  practice  amongst  the  ancient  Egyptians,  as 
well  as  the  Maori. 

It  is  also  remarkable  what  light  the  derivation  of  a single 
word  will  sometimes  throw  on  past  history.  The  following 
was  communicated  to  me  by  Cracroft  Wilson,  late  Judge  of 
Moradabad,  one  who  is  well  known  in  India,  not  only  for  his 
knowledge  of  Oriental  tongues,  but  especially  for  his  courage 
displayed  in  the  Indian  Mutiny  : — 

“ The  word  m-ss-r*  means  Egypt,  the  very  same  word 
is  used  to  designate  a certain  class  of  Brachmins  in  India. 
Considering  that  the  word  is  spelt  with  the  Arabic  letter 
swad,  not  the  ordinary  letter  to  express  our  s,  which 
is  named  seen,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  coming  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  class  of  Brachmins  so  designated  came 
to  India  from  Egypt,  and  were  at  once  individualised 
as  ‘ so-and-so 3 the  Egyptian.  Moreover,  there  were  two 
systems  of  medicine  prevalent  formerly  in  India : the  one 
the  Arabic — the  other  the  Egyptian  missuranee , and  the 
physicians  who  practised  the  Egyptian  were  Brachmins 
and  Hindoos,  the  Arabic  one  being  practised  by  Mo- 
hamudans.  One  class  of  Brachmin  is  called  Gashmeeree ; 
no  one  doubts  that  his  ancestors  came  from  Cashmere  to 
India ; another  class  of  Brachmin  is  called  Dooibay,  which 

* Pronounced  missur. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


25 


is  short  for  Doveda,  which  means  learned  in  two  of  the 
vedas  ; another  class  is  called  Tribar  dee,  which  means 
learned  in  three  of  the  vedas.  There  is  no  doubt  about 
the  origin  of  the  distinctive  title  in  the  case  of  three  dif- 
ferent classes  of  Brachmins,  why  should  we  doubt  about 
the  origin  of  the  title  of  a fourth  class,  viz.,  the  Missur 
class  ? The  Egyptians  worshipped  the  cow,  so  do  the 
Hindoos.”  The  order,  number,  and  character  of  castes, 
were  also  the  same. 

One  thing  very  observable  is,  that  whilst  in  all  the  wan- 
derings of  this  dark-skinned  race,  no  traces  of  architectural 
skill  have  been  found  in  any  of  the  stages  of  their  migration 
east ; yet,  when  it  arrives  at  the  spot  where  it  first  meets 
with  the  brown,  then  those  remains  seem  to  multiply  and  to 
be  of  such  a character  as  to  indicate  a knowledge  of  archi- 
tecture far  surpassing  that  now  possessed  by  any  of  the 
natives  of  the  Pacific  Ocean. 

Before  considering  the  Polynesian  tribes,  some  of  the  names 
by  which  aboriginal  races  are  known  may  be  mentioned  as 
bearing  testimony  to  the  first  and  most  ancient  having  been 
black. 

The  word  Maori,  or  Mauri,  by  which  the  natives  of  New 
Zealand  are  known,  seems  to  be  derived  from  the  black  blood 
of  the  heart,  and  to  have  been  given  by  the  Polynesians  to 
the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  islands  on  their  arrival  amongst 
them  as  a term  of  reproach  for  a despised  race,  equivalent  to 
that  of  nigger  with  us.  But  when  the  black  was  absorbed  in 
the  brown,  in  process  of  time  it  became  the  general  name  for 
native,  and  was  applied  to  the  entire  population,  as  well  as  to 
other  things ; thus,  fresh  water  is  wai  maori,  and  anything 
belonging  to  the  country  is  he  mea  maori , a native  thing. 
Perhaps  the  word  mauri,  or  moor,  has  had  a similar  origin ; 
hence  the  English  word  blackamoor.  So  likewise  may  the 
term  Hind  have  been  given  to  India  and  its  sable  inhabit- 
ants by  its  early  Aryan  conquerors,  and  thus  passed  on  to 
them  in  process  of  time,  though  also  signifying  black. 
So  with  the  words  Zend , Zind,  and  Scinde.  Thus  the 
very  names  by  which  those  races  are  still  known,  testify, 


26 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


that  whatever  changes  in  race  have  since  taken  place,  the 
aboriginal  one  was  black. 

In  tracing  the  brown  or  Polynesian  race  to  the  part  from 
whence  it  originally  came,  their  own  traditions  demand  the 
first  attention  ; they  all  declare  they  originally  came  from  the 
Society,  or  Sandwich  Isles,  known  to  them  by  the  same 
name  they  still  bear  amongst  their  inhabitants,  which  is 
Hawaiki,  or  Hawaii,  the  Sandwich  natives  having  since 
their  departure  either  lost  the  k,  or  the  Maori  gained  it.  In 
their  traditions  it  is  stated  that  they  touched  at  several 
islands,  where  they  remained  for  a time,  and  left  the  name 
of  the  country  they  came  from,  now  changed  into  Savaii, 
the  li  being  turned  into  s,  and  the  k dropped,  which  perhaps 
may  be  regarded  as  a proof  that  the  k has  only  been  acquired 
since  the  Maori  reached  his  present  abode.  Tahaiti  is  also 
supposed  to  have  been  another  of  their  temporary  resting 
places  • it  may  have  derived  its  name  from  being  viewed  by 
them  as  inferior  to  the  islands  they  had  left,  and  therefore 
termed  it  taha  iti , only  its  small  side.  That  the  Maori 
have  been  at  all  these  islands,  is  clearly  proved  by  identity 
of  language,  mythology,  traditions,  and  customs ; the  first 
canoes  they  came  in  are  described  as  resembling  those  found 
in  the  parts  they  came  from. 

Another  proof  is,  that  although  the  vegetation  of  New 
Zealand  greatly  differs  from  that  of  tropical  Polynesia,  still, 
wherever  the  Maori  fancied  they  perceived  a resemblance  to 
any  of  the  trees  they  were  formerly  accustomed  to,  they  be- 
stowed their  names  upon  them.  A singular  instance  of  this 
appears  in  the  name  of  the  Arica  Sapida,  the  beautiful-ringed 
palm  of  New  Zealand  ; they  gave  it  the  name  of  the  Cocoa 
Nut  Palm,  Niy  but  to  show  it  was  fruitless  they  added  kau , 
thus  it  is  called  Nikau , or  the  fruitless  palm  bearing  leaves 
only. 

They  have  likewise  traditions  of  their  forefathers,  having 
brought  with  them  the  Arum,  Taro , the  Calabash,  Hue , and 
the  sweet  potatoe,  Kumar  a ; now  these  are  all  tropical  plants 
of  Polynesia,  and  require  extreme  care  to  make  them  produce 
fruit  in  the  climate  of  New7  Zealand.  It  is  also  interesting  to 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


27 


observe  their  ingenious  contrivances  to  render  these  plants, 
on  which  they  so  greatly  depend  for  their  support,  pro- 
ductive. In  early  spring  the  seeds  of  the  Calabash  are 
wrapped  up  in  wet  rags  and  suspended  near  the  fire,  to 
make  them  shoot.  The  spots  selected  for  cultivation  are  not 
only  those  which  have  the  richest  soil  and  the  best  aspect, 
but  to  compensate  as  much  as  possible  for  the  difference  of 
latitude,  they  choose  the  steep  sides  of  hills,  so  as  to  render 
the  sun’s  rays  almost  vertical. 

The  Battle  Abbey  roll  does  not  preserve  the  names  of  the 
adventurers  who  accompanied  William  the  Conqueror,  more 
perfectly  than  the  Maori  traditions  do  those  of  the  adventurous 
chiefs  who  first  came  in  their  canoes  to  Hew  Zealand  ; and  it 
is  not  only  up  to  them  the  head  chiefs  trace  their  pedigrees, 
but  even  to  several  generations  before  they  left  Hawaiki, 
which  would  be  difficult  for  many  of  our  Norman  families  to 
do  in  their  native  country  before  they  landed  in  Britain ; and 
perhaps  the  period  of  the  arrival  of  one  closely  corresponded 
with  that  of  the  other. 

There  is  therefore  no  difficulty  in  tracing  the  Maori  as  far 
as  Hawaiki,  but  it  may  be  possible  to  find  some  of  the  foot- 
marks of  his  earlier  migrations.  The  prevalence  of  the 
easterly  trade  winds  would  greatly  aid  in  peopling  the  isles 
from  the  East.  Williams,  in  his  missionary  narrative,  states 
that  he  drifted  twelve  hundred  miles  in  his  boat  from  Raro- 
tonga to  Tongatapu  through  the  influence  of  those  trades, 
and  on  another  occasion  from  Tahiti  to  Aitutaki. 

There  are  remains  of  his  religion  to  be  found  in  the  wahi 
tapu,  sacred  grove,  the  marae , sacred  enclosure,  and  the 
tuahu , or  altar,  which  are  in  New  Zealand  ; and  the  more 
advanced  marae  of  Polynesia,  which  assume  pyramidical 
forms  and  dimensions,  until  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  and  even 
as  far  as  California  and  Columbia,  the  erections  become  so 
colossal  as  to  bear  a striking  resemblance  to  those  of  Egypt, 
the  elaborately-sculptured  temples,  pillars,  figures,  and 
altars  of  which,  are  little  behind  those  of  the  old  world. 

Still  it  is  to  be  acknowledged  that  there  are  remains  to  be 
seen  throughout  Polynesia,  which  may  belong  to  even  an 


28 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


older  and  more  advanced  race.  The  grand  platforms,  or 
terraces  of  stone  of  great  dimensions  may  belong  to  the 
Polynesian,  of  wdiich  there  are  similar  ones  found  in  Nu- 
kuhiva,  rising  step  by  step  for  a considerable  distance  up 
the  hill  side  ; terraces  which  cannot  be  less  than  one  hundred 
yards  in  length  and  twenty  in  breadth,  whose  magnitude  is 
still  less  striking  than  the  immense  size  of  the  blocks  com- 
posing them ; some  of  which  are  of  an  oblong  shape,  and  from 
ten  to  fifteen  feet  in  length  and  five  or  six  feet  thick,  their 
sides  are  quite  smooth,  but  though  square  and  of  pretty 
regular  formation,  they  bear  no  marks  of  the  chisel  upon 
them. 

In  the  Polynesian  marae,  or  hei  au,*  there  is  a striking 
similarity  to  the  temples  of  Mexico  ; there  is  the  same  wall 
of  stone  enclosing  the  whole  of  the  consecrated  ground,  and 
the  same  massive  pyramidical  structure,  with  the  sacred 
grove  on  the  summit  of  the  high  place  ; and  now  that  this 
massive  form  of  building  has  ceased,  it  seems  as  though  the 
remembrance  of  it  is  preserved  by  the  natives  of  the  Fiji 
islands  in  the  extraordinary  pyramidical-shaped  buildings 
they  erect,  although  made  of  the  most  perishable  materials. 

But  there  are  architectural  remains  of  a more  ancient 
character,  and  evincing  greater  advancement  than  even 
those  alluded  to.  St.  Julian  states,  on  most  of  the  groups 
there  are  evidences  of  a race  much  superior  in  civilization 
to  those  now  inhabiting  them.  Some  of  the  ruins  of  the  old 
temples  are  sufficient  to  show  that  their  extent  must  have 
been  immense. 

Even  as  far  west  as  New  Caledonia,  which  is  nearly  in  the 
meridian  of  New  Zealand,  there  are  evidences  of  ancient 
advancement  which  are  very  striking — paved  roads  and  for- 
tifications, and  even  the  remains  of  an  aquaduct  eight  miles 
in  length.fi  When  the  natives  were  spoken  to  about  those 
ruins,  they  replied,  “We  are  not  like  our  ancestors;  we 

* The  hei  au , or  temple,  is  literally  “ for  the  wind.”  Tu,  the  great  Polynesian 
god,  is  the  god  of  the  wind.  In  all  the  sacrifices  offered,  it  was  only  the  spirit 
of  the  sacrifice  which  the  god  was  supposed  to  consume  ; it  was  a wangai  hau , 
or  feeding  of  the  wind  or  god. 

f Cruise  of  the  Faiun,  p.  219,  an  extremely  interesting  little  work. 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


29 


cannot  build  large  bouses  as  they  did  : they  were  numerous 
and  wise,  we  are  neither  one  nor  the  other.”  Still,  they  use 
tools  of  green  jade,  and  make  coarse  pottery,  varnishing  it 
with  the  gum  of  the  damara,  and  painting  it  with  red  ochre. 

Dr.  Hotchstetter,  the  geologist  of  the  Novara,  writing  of 
the  monumental  ruins  in  the  interior  of  Puynipet  Island, 
says:  “We  were  informed  that  they  consisted  of  nothing 
more  than  a large  number  of  colossal  rough  hewn  blocks  of 
basalt  in  the  heart  of  the  forest,  near  Metelenia  harbour, 
and  that  the  character  of  the  ruins  evidences  a high  state  of 
civilization  in  those  who  erected  them.  Some  of  the  blocks 
are  eight  or  ten  feet  long  hexagonal,  and  must  evidently 
have  been  brought  from  other  parts,  since  with  the  exception 
of  these,  there  are  no  other  stones  of  a similar  description 
found  in  any  part  of  the  island;  streets  are  laid  out  at  various 
points,  and  the  settlement  seems  to  have  consisted  of  a 
range  of  strongly  fortified  dwellings.” 

These  columns  and  blocks  however  possess  a special  in- 
terest not  merely  in  the  history  of  civilization  but  of  geology, 
as  a part  is  at  present  under  water,  and  can  only  be  reached 
in  canoes.  Similar  ruins  are  described  by  Captain  Cheyne, 
as  having  been  also  found  in  the  forests  of  Nalan,  Strong’s 
Island,  one  of  the  Caroline  Archipelago,  latitude  5°  21'  30" 
N.,  and  163°  0'  42"  E.  Ion  * 

But  the  most  singular  remains  are  those  of  Ascension  or 
Ponapi,  an  island  of  the  same  group,  and  not  far  from  the 
former,  being  in  latitude  7°  N.  and  Ion.  E.  157°  50'.  The 
the  Bev.  C.  W.  Clark  wrote  an  account  of  them  in  the 
Honolulu  paper,  he  visited  them  in  1852.  “ There  are 

two  quadrangular  walls,  one  within  the  other,  236  feet 
by  162,  the  walls  are  from  six  to  ten  feet  thick,  and  in 
some  places  they  are  twenty-five  feet  high.  In  front  of 
the  inner  enclosure,  facing  the  entrance  to  the  outer,  is  a 
raised  platform,  ten  or  twelve  feet  wide ; the  inner  walls  are 
about  fourteen  feet  high  and  six  feet  thick,  the  top  rows  are 
of  basaltic  prisms,  of  which  the  wall  is  built,  projecting 
over  about  two  feet,  the  inner  enclosure  is  95  feet  by  75. 

* Voyage  of  the  Novara,  vol.  2,  p.  584,  585. 


30 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


In  tlie  centre,,  a little  raised  above  the  surrounding  ground, 
is  a large  vault,  the  ancient  entrance  to  it  was  thoroughly 
closed  by  basaltic  prisms,  but  I entered  by  a crevice  in  the 
top.  The  vault  inside  is  fifteen  feet  by  ten,  and  seven  by 
eight  in  depth ; the  top  of  the  vault  is  covered  with  immense 
basaltic  columns,  extending  the  whole  length,  and  measuring 
seventeen  feet  in  length.  On  the  top  there  is  a large  bread 
fruit  tree  growing,  whose  roots  extended  down  through  the 
vault  into  the  ground  below.  There  are  several  other  similar 
vaults  in  different  parts  of  the  ruins.” 

The  ruins  of  a large  town  under  water  are  seen  in  the 
shallows,  large  buildings,  regular  streets,  and  a square 
in  the  centre,  with  apparently  a large  temple ; changes  of 
level  taking  place  in  this  part  of  the  ocean  are  great  and 
frequent. 

At  Easter  Island  there  are  broken  down  terraces,  large 
stone  statues,  monuments  probably  of  ancient  deified  kings, 
and  mounds,  which  resemble  in  their  triangular  shape  the 
Teocallis  of  Mexico.  One  of  the  statues  measured  by  Mr. 
Foster  was  twenty- seven  feet  high  and  nine  feet  in  diameter.* 

In  the  Marquesas  and  Sandwich  Islands  are  still  more 
extensive  remains  of  mounds,  roads,  and  buildings,  similar 
to  those  in  South  America. 

Around  the  burial  ground  at  Moa  I observed  large  slabs 
of  a coarse  red  porphyry,  which  is  brought  from  an  island  in 
the  Lagoon ; this  is  the  rock  of  which  large  blocks  were 
conveyed  in  former  times  to  Tongataboo  in  their  great  war 
canoes,  when  its  chiefs  held  that  and  the  intermediate  isles 
of  Mua-foo  and  Keppels ; this  accounts  for  the  existence  of 
ruins  of  buildings  and  circles  of  stones,  composed  of  mate- 
rials obtained  from  distant  localities,  as  those  at  Kunaie, 
or  Strong^s  Isle,  at  Paasden,  Easter  and  other  isles. f 

* It  is  to  be  feared  that  these  most  interesting  monuments  of  byegone  days 
have  been  either  partially  or  entirely  destroyed  by  the  Peruvian  slave  hunters, 
who,  to  the  shame  of  their  country,  a few  years  ago  visited  those  lone  islands 
of  the  Pacific,  and  carried  off  their  inhabitants  to  work  as  slaves  in  the  mines. — ■ 
Cruise  of  the  Fawn. 
f Cruise  of  the  Fawn. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


31 


In  New  Zealand  Sir  G.  Grey,  tlie  governor,  made  the 
discovery  of  a cnrions  relic  of  antiquity  on  the  small  island 
of  Mokoia,  in  the  middle  of  Rotorua  Lake.  This  was 
formerly  an  extremely  sacred  spot,  where  their  most  vene- 
rated objects  were  preserved.  During  his  visit  there  in 
1866  he  found  two  old  priests  still  keeping  guard  over  them. 
Knowing  the  interest  the  Governor  took  in  everything  re- 
lating to  the  past  history  of  their  race,  and  probably  to 
ingratiate  themselves  with  him,  they  took  him  to  the  island, 
and  to  his  surprise  showed  him  the  site  of  an  ancient  temple, 
clearly  marked  by  flax  plants,  an  oblong  square  in  shape, 
with  a curious  recess  in  the  end,  the  furthest  removed  from 
the  entrance.  Into  this  adytum  the  old  priests  went, 
and  there  removing  a few  inches  of  the  soil  disclosed  a 
well  executed  idol  of  stone,  as  large  as  life ; it  was  repre- 
sented in  a sitting  posture,  with  the  elbows  resting  on  the 
knees,  the  legs  crossed,  and  the  face  looking  upwards.  This 
idol  the  Governor  stated  was  a fac  simile  of  one  presented 
to  him  on  a former  occasion  by  the  natives  of  the  same  part, 
only  of  much  smaller  size,  yet  apparently  of  a similar  kind 
of  stone,  a species  of  porphyry,  both  probably  brought 
by  their  ancestors  when  they  first  came  to  the  island.  Their 
traditions  state,  that  when  they  left  Hawaiki  they  took  their 
gods  with  them,  of  those  the  most  celebrated  were  five 
brought  by  Kiuwai  and  Hangaroa,  two  of  which  called 
Ilmngaru  and  Itupaoa  were  in  existence  unto  a very  late 
date.  The  Ihungaru  was  a lock  of  human  hair,  twisted 
with  a rope  of  ante,  made  from  the  paper  mulberry  bark, 
and  kept  in  a house  built  of  wood  brought  from  Hawaiki 
and  thatched  with  the  mange-mange.*  This  fell  into  the 
hands  of  Hongi  and  the  Ngapuhi  tribe  when  they  stormed 
the  Mokoia  Pa  in  1823,  where  it  was  preserved;  thence  it 
was  carried  to  an  eminence  on  the  main  land  overlooking 
the  lake,  where  the  victors  chopped  it  to  pieces  with  their 
tomahawks,  that  it  might  no  longer  be  a palladium  to  their 
enemies.  Of  the  Itupaoa  no  description  was  preserved ; it 
was  kept  with  the  former  at  Mokoia,  but  was  secreted  by  the 

* A beautiful  climbing  fern. 


32 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


priests,  as  was  supposed  some  where  on  the  Horapore  range.* 
It  is  therefore  highly  probable  that  the  statue  which  was 
disinterred  by  the  priests  for  the  Governor  to  see,  was  this 
identical  one  of  the  Itupaoa,  which,  doubtless,  from  its  size 
and  weight,  could  not  be  easily  carried  to  any  distance, 
especially  when  the  surrounding  country  was  already  in  the 
enemy’s  hands,  therefore  its  custodians  would  naturally  bury 
it  on  the  spot,  and  there  it  remained  for  forty-three  years, 
until  the  Governor’s  visit,  which  was  the  signal  for  its 
hahunga  or  disinterment. 

The  poor  old  priests  not  content  with  showing  the  Go- 
vernor the  statue,  likewise  took  him  to  the  spot  where 
Tuorangi,  the  great  Rotorua  giant  was  interred;  there  also 
removing  a little  soil,  they  disclosed  a stone  coffer  or  cist, 
eight  and  a half  feet  long,  formed  by  flagstones,  with  a cover 
of  the  same,  which  had  sloping  sides  like  the  roof  of  a house, 
with  the  ridge  on  the  top  curiously  sculptured.  Until  a 
few  years  ago,  there  were  sculptured  stones  remaining 
which  marked  the  boundaries  of  the  Mara  or  Kumara  ground 
of  Turi  at  Patea,  and  these  being  regarded  as  idols  by  a 
Wesleyan  catechist  stationed  there,  were  therefore  broken 
in  pieces. 

This  discovery  must  be  regarded  as  a highly  interesting 
one,  and  the  fact  of  such  antique  remains  still  existing  of  a 
period  when  the  Maori  race  must  have  been  in  a far  more 
advanced  state  than  they  are  now,  as  relates  to  the  arts 
of  civilized  life,  is  a proof  of  a retrograde  state  from  a 
higher  one. 

New  Zealand  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  utmost  limit  to 
which  the  Polynesian  race  reached.  Whether  the  remains 
referred  to  belong  to  it  entirely  or  not,  there  are  sufficient 
which  certainly  tend  to  prove  the  intimate  connection  be- 
tween it,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  western  coasts  of  Ame- 
rica. The  resemblance  of  the  Marae  in  their  pyramidical 
form  and  massive  structure  to  the  Teocalli  is  too  striking  to 
be  doubted;  nor  is  that  confined  to  the  worshipping  on 
“ high  places.”  Grove  worship  is  co-extensive  with  the 

* White’s  Lecture’s  on  Maori  Customs. 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


33 


other ; it  is  found  in  New  Zealand,  and  there  it  ends. 
It  belongs  peculiarly  to  the  Polynesian,  and  marks  his  pre- 
sence, as  the  Fetish  tree  does  that  of  the  African;  both  are 
found  and  both  finish  in  New  Zealand,  which  appears  to  be 
the  grand  terminus  to  the  south  of  those  two  great  sections 
of  the  human  family,  there  they  meet,  and  there  they  seem 
to  end  their  wide  extended  migrations,  each  proceeding 
from  the  opposite  quarter  of  the  globe  to  the  other. 

However  widely  the  migrations  of  the  black  and  brown 
races  have  extended  throughout  the  southern  hemisphere, 
the  Pacific  has  been  peopled  by  other  races  as  well. 

Sufficient  attention  has  not  been  given  to  the  amount 
of  influence  exercised  by  the  Japanese  in  former  days ; 
they  have  played  the  same  part  in  those  southern  seas  that 
the  sea  kings  did  in  the  north,  and  what  the  Malay  and 
Chinaman  are  still  doing  in  the  Indian  Archipelago,  where 
they  are  as  much  dreaded  as  the  north-men  ever  were  in 
past  times.  This  is  noticed  by  a recent  writer  and  voyager  : 
“ A great  infusion  of  Chinese  and  Japanese  blood,  the  old 
Japanese  vi-kings  spread  terror  along  the  coasts  of  China 
for  thousands  of  miles.  I saw  several  men  who,  if  met  with 
elsewhere,  would  have  been  taken  for  Chinese,  having  the 
same  oblique  eyes,  and  wearing  their  hair  in  two  little  twisted 
tails  behind  their  ears/'’*  A resemblance  is  likewise  to  be 
traced  between  the  Japanese  and  Maori  in  their  feasts  ; it  is 
the  custom  of  both  to  give  portions  to  their  guests,  and 
for  them  to  carry  away  what  they  receive.  In  former  times 
prostitution  was  not  viewed  as  any  discredit  to  the  un, 
married  female,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  considered  a part  of 
the  host-s  duty  in  bestowing  his  hospitality  to  offer  his  guests 
temporary  partners,  who  were  called  Waiaijpo.  Girls  were 
at  perfect  liberty  to  act  as  they  pleased  until  married,  when 
they  became  Tapu  to  their  husbands.  The  oblique  eye,  the 
prominent  cheek  bone,  the  absence  of  the  bridge  in  the  nose, 
the  hair  tied  up  into  a top-knot,  as  a tihi  or  tiki,  was  also  the 
Japanese  custom.  The  sacred  character  of  chiefs,  the  ariki, 
having  a kind  of  divinity  ascribed  to  them,  resembles  that  of 
* Cruise  of  the  Fawn , p.  143. 

D 


84 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


the  Japanese  Micado,  are  also  so  many  proofs  of  foreign  ad- 
mixture. This  seems  to  be  established  beyond  a doubt,  by  the 
discovery  of  an  ancient  bronze  bell,  which,  doubtless,  once 
belonged  to  a large  junk,  that  at  some  remote  period  had 
been  cast  away  on  the  New  Zealand  shores  ; the  crew,  pro- 
bably amounting  to  more  than  a hundred,  might  have  escaped 
to  the  land,  and  would,  doubtless,  be  fraternised  with  by  the 
tribe  belonging  to  that  district,  which  would  feel  its  im- 
portance increased  by  such  an  addition  from  a superior 
race,  just  as  it  did  with  the  European  on  his  first  arrival. 
This  bell  was  discovered  at  Wangarei  by  Mr.  Colenso,  the 
Church  Missionary  printer;  he  found  the  natives  cooking 
potatoes  in  it,  and  using  it  as  a Jcohua , iron  pot,  stopping 
up  a hole  in  it  with  a potatoe  ; he  offered  them  a new  pot 
for  it,  much  larger  and  better  adapted  for  the  purpose, 
which  they  thankfully  accepted.  He  enquired  whence  it  was 
obtained  ; they  said  that  a heavy  gale  blew  down  a large  tree, 
and  under  its  roots,  to  their  surprise,  they  found  the  bell. 
There  is  an  inscription  running  round  it,  which  the  writer 
believes  was  sent  to  Mr.  Crawford,  who  pronounced  it  to  be 
Tamil,  which  would  not  militate  against  the  supposition  here 
made,  as  China  received  the  Buddist  faith  from  Ceylon,  and, 
doubtless  with  it  their  sacred  bells,  which  would  be  prized 
as  a protection  for  their  junks  in  their  long  voyages. 
At  any  rate,  the  bell  is  a clear  proof  that  either  the  Chinese 
or  Japanese,  or  both,  have  visited  the  shores  of  New 
Zealand,  and  have  left  far  more  permanent  remains  of  the 
fact  than  even  the  bell,  in  the  oblique  eye  and  Tartar  ex- 
pression, which  is  so  perceptible  in  almost  every  part  of  the 
northern  island.  There  are  also  many  minor  points  of  re- 
semblance between  the  Maori  and  the  Chinese.  Both  speak 
of  Father  heaven  and  Mother  earth,  which  seems  con- 
nected with  the  Indian  myth  of  the  mundane  egg.  The 
way  a Chinese  takes  leave  of  his  friend  is  identical  with 
that  of  the  Maori.  The  Celestial  says  to  him,  main  main 
bean,  go  slowly ; to  which  the  person  leaving  replies,  cheang 
sani,  please  sit ; the  Maori  says  to  his  departing  friend, 
Jiacre  ra , or  haere  marire , go  truly  or  go  slowly,  and  he  an- 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


35 


swers,  e noho,  sit  down.*  Every  little  resemblance  is  inter- 
esting, as  furnishing  a link  of  the  chain  which  will  enable 
the  ethnologist  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  Maori.  The  Chi- 
nese have  also  a custom  of  taking  out  all  the  bones  from  the 
fowls  they  cook,  which  is  done  most  adroitly,  the  birds  still 
preserving  even  their  form : perhaps  the  Celestials  surpass  all 
other  nations  in  the  art  of  cookery,  and  if  any  portion  of  their 
race  had  their  lot  cast  amongst  the  Maori,  what  more  probable 
than  their  leaving  some  traces  of  their  culinary  teaching; 
the  Maori  cook,  though  not  quite  so  refined  in  this  noble 
art,  has  still  learnt  to  remove  most  skilfully  all  the  bones 
from  pigeons,  ducks,  and  other  birds.  The  Chinese  have 
their  food  cut  up  in  little  bits,  and  eat  with  a couple  of 
ivory  sticks ; this  appears  to  be  the  first  advance  from 
the  primitive  practice  of  eating  with  the  fingers,  as  is  still 
the  custom  amongst  the  orientals  and.  the  largest  portion  of 
the  human  race ; according  to  the  old  saying,  “ fingers 
were  made  before  forks/'’  which  the  Maori  acted  upon  in 
general,  but  when  he  was  tapu,  he  was  either  fed  by 
another  or,  like  a Chinese,  picked  his  food  out  of  his  kete , 
or  poti,  little  food  basket,  with  a sharpened  fern  stick. 

China  seems  then  once  to  have  had  a connection  with  New 
Zealand,  and  not  only  with  it,  but  its  junks  have  radiated 
in  every  direction,  to  the  east  as  well  as  to  the  south  ; 
and  the  nearer  we  approach  the  empire  of  that  singular 
people,  the  more  striking  will  the  resemblance  be  found  in 
manners,  customs,  religion,  and  language.  The  Maori 
house  is  built  as  though  its  architect  came  from  the  land  of 
the  bamboo  ; it  is  made  of  lattice  work,  beautifully  wrought 
in  different  coloured  patterns,  which  is  called  arajoaki. 
This  seems  decidedly  to  have  had  a Chinese  origin,  so  like- 
wise the  elaborately  embroidered  borders  of  their  mats, 
the  taniko , seems  far  beyond  the  civilization  of  the  people ; 
the  disposition  of  colours,  beauty  of  design,  so  far  in  ad- 
vance of  the  garments  manufactured  in  other  parts  of  the 
Pacific,  seem  clearly  to  point  to  China  for  its  first  fabri- 
cation. 

* The  Chinese  catty  is  much  the  same  as  the  Maori  kete — a basket. 

D 2 


36  THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 

The  Maori  has  traditions  which  can  scarcely  be  referred 
to  any  other  part  than  China.  One  of  these  evidently  re- 
lates to  the  horse,  that  some  of  their  forefathers  came  from 
a country  where  they  had  large  animals,  on  which  they  rode. 
When  Governor  King  first  presented  them  with  some  large 
Irish  pigs  they  fancied  that  they  must  have  been  the  ani- 
mals alluded  to,  being  the  largest  they  had  ever  seen,  and 
actually  killed  one  or  two  out  of  the  three  given,  in  their 
efforts  to  realize  the  tradition ; but  when  they  afterwards  saw 
the  horse,  and  Mr.  Marsden  riding  upon  it,  great  was  their 
admiration,  they  exclaimed,  “ Ah,  now  we  see  what  our 
forefathers  said  was  true.”  Another  tradition  evidently  re- 
ferred to  the  use  of  iron  in  the  Jand  they  came  from.  It 
was  that  their  ancestors  had  Toki’s  axes,  which  were  not 
tied  on  to  the  handle  as  their  stone  ones  were,  but  had  the 
handle  thrust  through  an  eye  in  the  axe,  and  so  fastened ; this 
they  could  not  believe,  until  Captain  Cook  came,  and  when 
he  gave  them  some  small  iron  hatchets  their  astonishment 
knew  no  bounds. 

China  may  likewise  be  regarded  as  the  country  where 
ancestral  worship  has  its  chief  seat.  This  also  presents 
a strong  point  of  resemblance  between  the  Maori  and  Chi- 
nese ; they  worshipped  their  ancestors,  and  regarded  them  as 
gods  ; in  fact,  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  of  their  gods  were 
not  ancestors,  even  their  very  houses  were  in  some  respects 
ancestral  temples  ; their  fronts  are  ornamented  with  carved 
representations  of  ancestors,  one  stands  on  the  top  of  the  gable 
end,  by  which  they  enter,  as  if  to  guard  the  approach ; the 
post  which  supports  the  wahamahau,  verandah  of  the  chiePs 
house,  is  carved  at  its  base,  another  ancestor  keeps  watch  over 
the  door.  The  ground  plate  which  supports  the  house  is  carved 
to  represent  the  prostrate  bodies  of  slaves  who  had  been 
sacrificed ; on  them  the  figures  of  ancestors  stood,  and  en^ 
tering  the  house,  beneath  the  highly  ornamented  maihi,  the 
curved  facing  board  of  the  house,  the  first  object  inside 
is  the  grand  post  which  supports  the  building,  carved  at 
the  base  to  represent  the  chief  ancestor  of  the  family  or 
tribe,  at  his  feet  is  the  fire-place,  made  by  four  flagstones. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


37 


forming  as  it  were  a family  altar,  which  always  burnt  in 
honour  of  their  great  ancestor,  around  whom  his  descend- 
ants assembled  and  rested  under  his  protection.  The  chief 
could  not  eat,  or  drink,  or  smoke  in  his  house,  because  it 
was  sacred,  and  to  mark  its  being  so  it  was  painted  red  ; 
when  he  took  his  meals  he  sat  outside  in  the  verandah,  and 
his  children,  wives,  and  followers  went  into  the  open  marae. 
The  house  too  was  generally  called  after  the  great  ancestor 
of  the  chief,  as  Te  tihi  o Manono , the  top-knot  of  Manono. 
These  are  a few  of  the  connecting  links  between  the  Maori 
and  the  Chinese. 

It  is  evident  that  the  Chinese  have  early  visited  the  shores 
of  Am  erica,  and  doubtless,  imparted  much  of  the  civilization 
which  its  inhabitants  had  attained  when  found  by  the  Euro- 
pean. How  greatly  will  our  knowledge  of  the  southern 
hemisphere  be  increased  when  our  acquaintance  with  Chinese 
literature  becomes  increased.  It  is  now  pretty  clear  that  some 
Chinese  junk  drifted  to  the  coast  of  Mexico,  and  that  Ame- 
rica was  known  to  that  singular  people  many  centuries 
before  its  discovery  by  Columbus.  In  the  year  499  a 
Bonze  wrote  an  account  of  a country  in  the  far  east,  which 
he  called  Fou-Sang,  and  the  description  closely  agrees 
with  what  we  know  of  Mexico  in  its  most  flourishing  and 
civilized  period.  The  only  thing  contrary  to  our  know- 
ledge is,  that  the  Bonze  speaks  of  horses,  and  it  has  always 
been  assumed  there  were  no  horses  in  any  part  of  the  Ame- 
rican continent  until  they  were  carried  there  by  the  Spaniards. 
The  Bonze  mentions  a sort  of  deer  which  the  natives  of  the 
country  employed  as  beasts  of  burthen  ; this  was  clearly  the 
alpaca.*  The  mention  of  the  alpaca  seems  rather  to  refer  to 
Peru,  and  the  period  the  Bonze  wrote  would  nearly  agree  with 
that  of  Manco  Capac : but  however  that  may  be,  it  appears, 
independent  of  other  reasons,  highly  probable  that  America 
received  its  civilization  from  China,  if  not  its  original  in- 
habitants ; at  any  rate,  there  is  a singular  proof  not  only 
that  the  Chinese  or  eastern  Asiatics  have  been  in  America, 

* Recherclies  sur  le  Navigations  des  Chinois  de  Cote  de  V Amerique,  par  M. 
de  Guignes. 


38 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


but  that  they  have  likewise  brought  away  some  of  the  pro- 
ducts and  customs  of  that  continent. 

The  Chinese  state  that  tobacco,  and  the  use  of  it,  came 
from  the  Mantchoos  ; that  they  were  much  surprised  when 
they  first  saw  their  conquerors  inhale  fire  through  long  tubes 
and  eating  smoke.  This  plant  in  the  Mantchoo  language 
is  called  Tambakou , but  the  Chinese  designate  it  by  the 
word  meaning  smoke ; they  say  they  cultivate  in  their  fields 
the  smoke  leaf,  and  name  the  pipe  the  smoke  funnel.  To- 
bacco is  now  universally  used  amongst  them.* 

It  is  not  improbable  that  the  Chinese  obtained  their 
maize  in  the  same  way,  and  had  it  centuries  before  America 
was  discovered  by  the  Europeans. f 

The  Japanese  in  former  times  were  celebrated  for  their 
long  voyages  and  plundering  expeditions  : that  they  visited 
New  Zealand  is  highly  probable  ; their  junks  may  have  been 
cast  away  on  its  shores,  and  if  so,  as  marauders  and  con- 
siderable in  number,  would  be  able  to  maintain  their  inde- 
pendence and  form  alliances.  The  remarkable  similarity  of 
dressing  the  hair  by  tying  it  up  into  a top-knot,  favours  this 
supposition. 

In  1845  three  Japanese  were  carried  to  Ningpo,  in  China, 
by  the  American  frigate,  St.  Louis ; they  had  been  blown 
or  drifted  right  across  the  Atlantic  in  a little  junk  from  the 
coast  of  Japan  all  the  way  to  Mexico,  where  they  had  re- 
sided two  years.  Dr.  Pickering  shows  how  naturally  and 
almost  inevitably  a bark  carried  away  from  Japan  in  a 
storm  would  drift  to  the  coast  of  Mexico  or  California. 
The  same  gentleman  states  that  a Japanese  vessel  some 
few  years  ago  was  fallen  in  with  by  a whaler  in  the  North 
Pacific,  another  was  wrecked  on  the  Sandwich  Isles,  and  a 

* Hue's  Chinese  Empire , p.  130. 

t Fifteen  miles  north  of  Lambajique  lies  the  Indian  village  of  Iting  (repose), 
with  5,000  inhabitants,  whose  language  is  totally  different  from  the  Quichua 
dialect,  usually  spoken  in  the  provinces.  One  Peruvian,  on  his  return  from 
his  travels,  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  idiom  of  the  Iting  Indians 
strongly  resembled  that  of  the  Chinese. — Voyage  of  the  Novara , vol.  iii.  p. 
419. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


39 


third  drifted  to  the  American  coast,  near  the  mouth  of  the 
Columbia  river,  in  the  Oregon  territory. 

Many  similar  instances  are  recorded  ; these,  however, 
are  sufficient  to  prove  how  widely  dispersed  the  Japanese 
have  been  amongst  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  and  how  much 
they  may  have  contributed  to  their  existing  inhabitants. 
Nor  can  the  fact  of  their  having  reached  America  as  well  as 
the  Chinese  be  overlooked. 

The  Sacred  Emperor  of  Japan,  in  the  extreme  reverence 
paid  to  him,  resembled  the  sacred  king  of  Tonga,  as  well 
as  the  Tartar  god-priest  Dalai  Lama,  and  perhaps  Manco 
Capac,  the  child  of  the  sun,  who,  with  his  wife  Oello,  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  spiritual,  as  well  as  temporal  polity  of 
Peru,  may  have  had  a common  origin.  They  were  evidently 
strangers  who  came  from  a far  more  civilized  people  than  the 
Peruvians,  and  as  we  find  that  both  the  Chinese  and  Ja- 
panese reached  America  long  before  the  European,  it  is  not 
improbable  that  they  contributed  much  to  American  civi- 
lization.* 

* Stephens  states  that  at  Huacho,  an  Indian  village,  fourteen  leagues  from 
Chancay,  he  heard  a tradition  of  the  first  Inca  Manco  Capac,  which  every  one 
there  seemed  to  be  familiar  with.  A white  man  was  found  on  the  coast  by  a 
certain  Cacique,  whose  name  was  Cocapac  ; by  signs  he  asked  the  white  man 
who  he  was,  and  received  for  answer,  an  Englishman.  He  took  him  to  his 
home  and  married  him  to  his  daughter,  by  whom  he  had  a son,  Ingasman 
Cocapac,  and  a daughter,  Mama  Oelle  ; they  were  of  a fair  complexion,  and 
had  light  hair,  and  dressed  differently  from  the  Indians.  The  stranger  soon 
after  died.  From  his  account  of  the  manner  in  which  his  countrymen  lived  and 
were  governed,  Cocapac  determined  on  exalting  his  family,  and  having  in- 
structed the  boy  and  girl  in  what  he  proposed  to  do,  he  took  them  first  to  the 
plain  of  Cusco,  where  one  of  the  largest  tribes  then  resided,  and  informed  them 
that  their  god,  the  sun,  had  sent  them  two  of  his  children  to  make  them  happy, 
and  to  govern  them.  He  told  them  to  go  to  a certain  mountain  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning  at  sunrise,  and  search  for  them,  that  the  viracochas , children  of 
the  sun,  had  hair  like  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  that  their  faces  were  of  the 
colour  of  the  sun.  In  the  morning  the  natives  went  there,  and  found  the 
young  man  and  woman,  but,  surprised  at  their  features  and  colour,  declared 
that  the  couple  were  a wizard  and  a witch-  They  now  sent  them  to  Rimac 
Malca,  the  plain  on  which  Lima  stands,  but  the  old  man  followed  them, 
and  next  took  them  to  the  neighbonrhood  of  the  Lake  of  Titicaca,  where 
another  powerful  tribe  resided*  Cocapac  told  them  the  same  story,  but 
requested  them  to  go  and  search  for  the  Viracochas  on  the  edge  of  the 


40 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


The  account  of  the  architectural  remains  in  Yucatan,  given 
by  Stephens,  seems  to  confirm  this  idea.  There  can  be  no 
doubt,  whatever  might  be  the  character  of  the  picture  tablets  of 

lake  at  sun  rise  ; they  did  so,  and  found  them  there,  and  immediately 
declared  them  to  be  the  children  of  their  god,  and  their  supreme  governors. 
Elated  with  his  success  Cocapac  was  determined  to  be  revenged  on  the  In- 
dians of  Cusco  ; for  this  purpose  he  privately  instructed  his  grandchildren  in 
what  he  intended  to  do,  and  then  informed  the  tribe  that  the  Viracochas , Ingas- 
man Cocapac,  had  determined  to  search  for  the  place  where  he  was  to  reside  : 
he  bid  them  take  their  arms  and  follow  him,  saying,  wherever  he  struck  his 
golden  rod  or  sceptre  into  the  ground,  that  was  the  spot  where  he  chose  to 
remain.  The  young  man  and  woman  directed  their  course  to  the  plains  of 
Cusco,  where  having  arrived  the  signal  was  given,  and  the  Indians  there  sur- 
prised by  the  reappearance  of  the  Viracochas , and  overawed  by  the  number  of 
their  attendants,  accepted  them  as  their  rulers  and  as  the  children  of  their  sun 
god. — Stephenson' s Travels  in  South  America , vol.  i.  p.  394 

When  Her  British  Majesty’s  ship  Breton  was  at  Calloa,  some  of  the 
officers  accompanied  me  one  Sunday  afternoon  to  the  Alameda  at  Lima  : on 
our  way  we  were  saluted  by  several  Indians  from  the  mountains,  calling  us 
their  countrymen  and  their  relations,  begging  at  the  same  time  that  we  would 
drink  some  chicha  with  them. 

There  is  a curious  analogy  between  this  tradition  and  one  that  I had  from 
the  mouth  of  Don  Santos  Pires,  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  in  1823.  He  told  me  that 
before  the  discovery  of  the  Brazils,  an  Englishman  had  been  shipwrecked,  and 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Coboculo  Indians  ; he  had  preserved  or  obtained 
from  the  wreck  a musket  and  some  ammunition,  with  which  he  had  both  ter- 
rified and  pleased  the  Indians,  who  called  him  Carnaruru , the  man  of  fire,  and 
elected  him  their  king.  He  taught  them  several  things  of  which  they  were 
before  ignorant  (as  did  Manco  Capac  and  Mama  Oelle,  the  Peruvians)  ; he 
was  alive  at  the  conquest  of  the  country,  and  was  carried  to  Portugal,  when 
Emanuel  granted  him  a valley  near  to  Bahia,  independent  of  the  crown  Don 
Santos  is  the  brother  of  the  Baron  de  Torre,  both  lineal  descendants  of  Car- 
naruru , of  which  he  boasted  not  a little,  adding,  that  to  the  present  time  none 
of  the  lineal  descendants  had  ever  married  a Portuguese.  The  Muysca  Indians 
of  the  plains  of  Cundinamarca  have  a white  man  with  a beard,  called  Bochicha, 
]M emquetheba,  or  Suhe,  for  under  these  different  nameshe  is  spoken  of  as  their 
legislator.  This  old  man,  like  Manco  Capac,  taught  them  to  build  huts  and 
live  in  communities,  to  till  the  ground  and  to  harvest  the  produce  ; as  also  to 
clothe  themselves,  with  other  comforts  ; but  his  wife,  Chia,  Yubecayguaya,  or 
Huythaca,  for  she  is  also  known  by  three  different  names,  was  not  like  Mama 
Oelle,  who  taught  the  females  to  spin,  to  weave,  and  to  dye  the  clothes.  Chia, 
on  the  contrary,  opposed  and  thwarted  every  enterprize  for  the  public  good 
adopted  by  Bochicha,  who,  like  Manco  Capac,  was  the  child  of  the  sun,  dried 
the  soil,  promoted  agriculture,  and  established  wise  laws.  The  Inca  did  not 
separate  the  ecclesiastical  authority  from  the  political,  as  Bochicha  did,  but 
established  a theocracia.  The  first  opened  ah  outlet  to  the  lake  Titicaca,  for 
the  benefit  of  his  subjects,  at  a place  now  called  Desaguadero , the  outlet ; 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


41 


Mexico,,*  there  are  in  Yucatan  numerous  monuments  remain- 
ing with  inscriptions  in  letters  of  a modified  hieroglyphic 
character,  which  are,  perhaps,  more  nearly  approaching  a 
fixed  alphabet  than  those  of  the  Chinese,  and  more  closely 
resembling  the  Japanese,  to  which  some  of  the  sculptures  of 
the  noble  palaces  of  Palenque,  seem  to  bear  a striking 
resemblance,  especially  in  the  similarity  of  costume  and  the 
way  of  dressing  the  hair. 

<(  The  natives/'  says  Herrera,  the  Spanish  historian,  ee  wore 
their  hair  long  like  women,  and  a little  tail  hung  behind. 

while  the  latter,  for  the  same  purpose,  opened  the  lake  of  Bogota  at  Tequen- 
dama.  The  Inca  bequeathed  his  sovereign  authority  to  his  son,  while  Bochi- 
cha  named  two  chiefs  for  the  government,  and  retired  to  Tunja , holy  valley, 
where  he  lived  two  thousand  years,  or,  as  other  traditions  state,  where  his 
descendants  governed  the  Muysca  tribe  for  two  thousand  years.  The  first  of 
these  successors  was  called  Huncahua,  and  the  rest  Huncas,  which  was  the 
name  of  the  holy  city ; but  the  Spaniards  have  changed  the  name  to  Tunja. 
The  Mexicans  have  likewise  a bearded  white  man  as  a legislator,  called  Quat- 
zalcoath  ; he  was  the  high  priest  of  Cholula,  chief  of  a religious  sect,  and 
a legislator ; he  preached  peace  to  men,  and  prohibited  all  sacrifices  to  the 
Deity,  excepting  the  first  fruits.  We  have  here  the  tradition  of  four  white  men 
distinguished  by  the  people  of  the  new  world,  as  having  beards,  a circumstance 
as  remarkable  to  them,  as  it  was  visible,  for  they  being  beardless,  wrould  con- 
sequently be  surprised  at  seeing  men  whose  faces  bore  what  they  would  be  led 
to  consider  a feature  so  distinguishing.  Two  of  these  are  said  to  have  been 
Englishmen.  Of  the  laws  established  by  Camaruru  I have  no  information,  but 
those  established  by  Manca  Capac  I know  have  no  analogy,  nor  do  they  bear 
any  resemblance  to  those  of  any  of  the  northern  governments,  except,  setting 
aside  lineal  descent,  the  papal,  where  the  spiritual  authority  is  exercised  by  the 
King  of  Rome.  This  coincidence  of  four  men,  bearing  the  same  mark  of  a 
beard,  three  of  whom  were  priests  and  legislators,  occurred  at  places  the  most 
distant  from  each  other,  the  one  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  in  lat.  22.  54.  10.  S.,  Long. 
42.  43.  45.  W.  ; one  at  Cusio  in  lat.  13.  S.,  long.  81.  W.  ; one  at  Cundina- 
marca  in  lat  4.  35.  N.,  long.  74.  8. ; and  the  other  at  Cholula,  in  lat.  19.  4. 
N.,  long.  98.  14.  W.  The  traditions  of  Manco  Capac,  Bochicha,  and  Quat- 
zalcoath  agree  in  predicting  the  arrival  of  bearded  men  at  some  future  period, 
and  the  conquest  of  the  different  countries  by  them,  which  predictions  operated 
strongly  in  favour  of  Pizarro,  Benalcazar,  and  Cortes,  and  produced  that  sub- 
mission of  the  Peruvians,  Muyseas,  and  Mexicans,  wdiich  finally  laid  the  foun- 
dation of  the  degraded  state  of  their  descendants. — Stephenson' s Travels  in 
South  America , vol.  i.  p. 

* Stephens  thinks  that  the  characters  of  the  Mexican  Hieroglyphical  Paint- 
ings preserved  in  the  libraries  of  Dresden  and  Vienna,  are  the  same  as  those 
found  on  the  monuments  and  tablets  of  Copan  and  Palenque. 


42 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


They  wore  a roller  eight  fingers  broad  round  about  them 
instead  of  breeches,  and  going  several  times  round  the  waist. 
They  flatten  their  heads  and  foreheads.” 

Amongst  the  natives  of  Nangkauri  and  other  neighbouring 
islands  the  custom  prevails  of  pressing  quite  flat  the  heads 
of  the  newly -born  infants,  probably  in  conformity  with  Nico- 
bar laws  of  taste  and  beauty.* 

Speaking  of  the  physical  characteristics  of  the  Polynesian, 
Monsieur  a de  Quarte  Pages  states,  a flat  nose  is  regarded 
as  a sign  of  beauty ; this  was  the  case  with  the  Maories. 
They  flattened  the  nose  of  the  infant  almost  as  soon  as  born ; 
the  nurse  took  a soft  piece  of  cloth,  and  gradually  pressed 
upon  the  bridge  of  the  infanPs  nose  with  her  finger,  which 
was  kept  upon  it  for  a full  hour,  until  the  bridge  was  broken 
and  gave  way,  a few  drops  of  blood  generally  flowed  from 
the  nostrils.  The  flattened  nose  was  considered  a great 
ornament ; may  not  this  custom  account  for  what  the  ethno- 
logist has  regarded  as  a distinctive  feature  of  race.  It 
appears  to  be  a widely  extended  custom,  most  probably  co- 
extensive with  the  Polynesian  race,  and  even  beyond  it, 
being  practised  in  Samoa,  in  Malicolo,  and  other  isles,  as 
well  as  New  Zealand. f The  flattened  heads  of  the  Oregon 
North  American  Indians  affords  a similar  proof  of  change  of 
form  artificially  produced. 

The  same  custom  prevails  with  the  Nicobar  Islanders  also. 
Dr.  Hochstetter  states  that  he  took  away  the  skull  of  an 
Indian  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Arica,  which  was  remark- 
able for  its  singular  malformation,  resulting  from  compression 
by  circular  bandages.  This  artificial  disfigurement  of  the 
skull  has  its  origin  in  the  peculiar  customs  of  several  Indian 
races  of  both  North  and  South  America,  of  mechanically 
altering  the  form  of  the  cranium  in  the  new-born  infant.  J 

Many  of  the  Peruvian  customs  resembled  those  of  the 

) 

* Voyage  of  Novara,  vol.  ii.  p 32. 

f The  custom  of  flattening  the  nose  so  general  in  New  Zealand,  attains  also 
in  Samoa:  There  a canoe  nose  is  considered  a great  blemish. — Cruise  of  the 
Fawn,  p.  190. 

X Voyage  of  the  Novara,  vol.  iii.  p.  347. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


43 


Maori.  The  former  could  not  select  his  own  wife,  this  was 
done  for  him  by  the  government ; so  also  with  the  Maori,  the 
wife  is  chosen  by  the  Runanga  or  council  of  the  place, 
without  the  parties  having  anything  to  do  with  it,  beyond 
giving  their  consent.  Amongst  the  Maori,  polygamy  was 
universally  practised.  The  chiefs  ranked  in  a great  measure 
according  to  the  number  and  dignity  of  their  wives ; a great 
chief  had  from  six  to  ten,  but  more  generally  only  two. 
The  treatment  of  their  wives  was  very  different  from  that  of 
the  Moslems ; they  had  quite  as  much  liberty  as  with  us,  if 
not  more.  A chief  by  marrying  a great  number  of  ladies  of 
rank  greatly  extended  his  means  of  hospitality ; each  wife 
residing  on  her  own  land,  and  cultivating  it  with  her  slaves, 
was  thus  not  only  able  to  entertain  her  husband  when  he 
visited  the  place,  but  when  parties  of  strangers  came  to  see 
him,  he  also  had  the  means  of  liberally  entertaining  them ; 
for,  according  to  the  Maori  proverb,  “ a man  with  many  wives 
never  wants  food,  but  with  only  one  can  never  receive  his 
friends  according  to  their  rank/'  They  also  worked  mats  and 
garments,  and  made  green  stone  ornaments.  However  many 
wives  a chief  might  have,  they  generally  lived  most  amicably 
together.  Amongst  the  lady  wives  the  first  married  took 
precedence,  and  was  styled  Te  Wahine  Matua , the  mother 
lady,  the  others  were  called  Te  Muri  Manu,  the  birds  that 
followed.  In  war  the  chief,  generally  added  to  the  number. 
These  were  called  slave  wives,  nga  wahine  iti.  But  although 
treated  as  inferiors,  their  children  ranked  the  same  as  the 
others,  and  if  a slave  wife’s  child  happened  to  be  the  first- 
born it  enjoyed  all  the  privileges  belonging  to  it  as  the 
Matamua,  or  first-born.  The  Maori  had  no  marriage  service 
or  rites. 

Another  similarity  was,  the  cultivating  the  land  for  their 
chiefs.  The  Peruvians  tilled  it  for  the  Incas ; this  was 
done  with  great  ceremony,  the  whole  population  in  a body 
at  early  dawn  were  summoned  together,  they  went  through 
the  labours  of  the  day  with  the  same  joyous  spirit,  chanting 
their  popular  ballads  j * so  with  the  Maori,  all  used  to  unite 

* Prescott'' s Peru . 


44 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


in  cultivating  the  land,  and  it  was  made  a kind  of  merry 
making,  lightening  their  toil  with  song. 

When  an  Inca  died  a number  of  his  favourite  concubines 
and  attendants  were  immolated  on  his  tomb;  four  thousand 
are  said  to  have  been  put  to  death  forHuayna  Capac,  the  last 
Inca,  before  the  coming  of  the  Spaniards.  So  with  the 
Maori  : when  the  Ariki  or  head  chief  died,  his  favourite 
wives  strangled  themselves  and  a number  of  slaves  were 
put  to  death,  to  accompany  their  lord  and  wait  upon  him  in 
the  Reinga.  When  a favourite  wife  of  a chief  died  some  of 
her  female  slaves  were  killed  to  bear  her  company.  This 
was  an  almost  universal  practice  throughout  Polynesia. 

On  the  death  of  an  Inca  his  palaces  were  abandoned,  his 
treasures,  furniture,  and  apparel  were  suffered  to  remain  as 
he  left  them,  and  his  numerous  mansions  were  closed  up  for 
ever.  The  new  sovereign  had  to  provide  himself  with  every- 
thing new  for  his  royal  estate.  The  popular  belief  was,  that 
the  soul  of  the  departed  would  return  after  a time  to  reani- 
mate his  body  on  earth,  and  they  wished  that  he  should 
find  everything  to  which  he  had  been  used  in  life  left  for 
him  when  he  came  back.* 

When  a Maori  chief  died,  everything  in  his  house  was 
left  just  as  it  was  ; the  door  was  fastened,  and  the  house 
painted  with  red  ochre,  a sign  that  it  was  tapu  for  ever. 
Formerly  the  houses  of  the  dead  in  some  of  the  Pas  were 
more  numerous  than  those  of  the  living.  In  some  parts  of 
New  Zealand  the  chief  was  buried  in  his  own  house,  and 
his  widow  spread  her  mat  over  the  grave,  and  slept  upon  it, 
that  the  spirit  of  the  deceased  might  feel  it  had  lost  none  of 
its  rights  by  death.  To  avoid  the  sacrifice  of  a good  house 
which  was  generally  used  by  all  the  chief's  followers,  when 
a chief  seemed  to  be  dangerously  ill,  it  was  customary  to 
erect  a small  hut  for  him  in  some  retired  spot,  ostensibly 
that  he  might  not  be  annoyed  with  the  noise  of  the  Pa,  but 
in  reality  to  save  the  good  house,  as  then  when  he  died 
his  hut  only  would  be  burnt,  but  when  he  was  buried  every- 
thing belonging  to  him  was  interred  likewise. 

* Prescott's  Peru,  p.  30. 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA.  45 

Hotchstetter  states  : — “ I was  fully  convinced  here  that  the 
Indians  buried  their  dead  in  the  houses  where  they  had  re- 
sided, as  I dug  up  many  of  them.  They  appear  to  have  been 
buried  with  whatever  belonged  to  them  at  the  time  of  their 
death.  I have  found  women  with  their  pots,  pans,  and  jars  of 
earthenware,  some  of  which  are  very  curious.  One  kind  is 
composed  of  two  hollow  spheres,  each  about  three  inches  in 
diameter ; they  are  connected  by  a small  tube  placed  in  the 
centre,  and  a hollow  arched  handle  to  hold  it  by,  having  a 
hole  on  the  upper  side  ; if  water  be  poured  into  this  hole  till 
the  jar  is  about  half  full,  and  the  jar  be  then  inclined  first  to 
one  side  and  then  to  the  other,  a whistling  noise  is  produced. 
Sometimes  a figure  of  a man  stands  on  each  jar,  and  the 
water  is  poured  down  an  opening  in  his  head,  and  by  the 
same  means  the  noise  is  occasioned.  I saw  one  of  these  at 
the  Carmelite  nunnery  at  Quito,  having  two  Indians  upon  it 
carrying  a corpse  on  their  shoulders,  laid  on  a hollow  bier 
resembling  a butcher’s  tray  ; when  the  jar  was  inclined  back- 
wards and  forwards  a plaintive  cry  was  heard,  resembling 
that  made  by  the  Indians  at  a funeral.  The  jars  and  other 
utensils  were  of  good  clay,  and  well  baked,  which,  with  the 
ingenious  construction  just  alluded  to,  prove  that  the  Indians 
were  acquainted  with  the  art  of  pottery.” 

The  Costarica  Indians  of  Central  America  dance  as  a mani- 
festation of  grief  on  the  death  of  their  chiefs.  The  Maori 
also  had  their  funereal  dance,  the  maemae,  so  likewise  with 
the  Malay  and  Hindu.  The  Maori  also,  like  the  Irish,  howl 
over  the  dead,  and  then  feast;  perhaps  this  is  one  of  the 
oldest  and  most  general  customs  of  all. 

The  Mexican  spade  was  called  a ho,  so  also  the  Maori  one,  in 
shape  it  is  formed  like  a paddle  with  a rest  for  the  toe,  about 
a foot  from  the  ground.  The  Peruvian  likewise  had  one, 
which  was  forced  through  the  ground  by  six  or  eight  men 
pulling  it  by  ropes,  the  ploughman  resting  all  his  weight 
upon  it. 

Tbe  Peruvian  word  for  queen,  coy  a,  closely  resembles 
the  Maori  huia,  also  applied  to  a lady  of  rank;  amongst 
some  of  the  North  American  natives  the  word  for  woman 


46 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


is  quay , or  quee ; in  New  Zealand  hui  is  old  woman,  or 
grandmother. 

Amongt  the  Fiji  several  points  of  resemblance  with  Ame- 
rica are  to  be  noticed  : their  name  for  God  is  Nanitu, 
that  of  the  North  Americans  is  Manitu.  The  Fiji,  as  well 
as  the  Tonga  natives,  have  a kind  of  ceremonial  or  court 
language,  as  in  China  and  Japan.  In  New  Zealand  a court 
tone  of  voice  is  assumed  by  the  head  chiefs  on  grand  occa- 
sions, and  certain  words  are  only  then  used,  which  are  never 
heard  in  ordinary  conversation.  The  pottery  of  the  Fiji  is 
almost  identical  with  that  of  Mexico  and  Peru ; they  also  make 
double  pots  connected  by  a handle,  both,  perhaps,  having 
taken  the  idea  from  two  calabashes,  connected  by  a handle, 
for  the  better  carrying  of  a larger  quantity  of  water.  The 
glazing  likewise  seems  to  be  the  same,  both  being  made  by 
the  aid  of  a little  salt. 

The  sacrificing  of  human  beings  at  the  dedication  of  tem- 
ples or  houses,  which  was  common  in  Mexico,  was  also  prac- 
tised in  Borneo  and  other  islands,  and  seems  once  to  have 
been  so  by  the  Maori,  as  they  still  have  the  posts  of  their 
houses  resting  on  the  carved  images  of  victims. 

One  of  the  grand  distinguishing  features  of  American 
architecture  are  its  pyramids,  which  are  found  as  far  north 
as  California,  if  not  still  further.  At  first  sight  they  ap- 
pear to  point  to  some  ancient  intercourse  with  Egypt ; but 
that  resemblance  only  exists  in  the  general  form  of  the 
structure.  The  Egyptian  Pyramids  have  interior  chambers 
and  passages,  those  of  America  are  solid,  for  as  yet  no  cham- 
bers have  been  discovered  in  them.  There  is  no  pyramid  in 
Egypt  with  a temple  on  the  top  like  the  Peruvian  ones, 
which  were  used  as  foundations  for  their  sacred  buildings. 
They  are  in  fact  to  be  regarded  as  high  places,  and  thus 
are  more  nearly  allied  to  those  of  Asia  than  of  Egypt  ; 
but  they  are  evidently  the  original  models  of  the  marae, 
which  pervade  the  whole  of  the  southern  hemisphere;  the 
nearer  to  America  and  the  closer  the  resemblance,  they 
diminish  with  distance,  and  the  last  trace  of  them  appears 
to  be  found  in  New  Zealand. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


47 


The  high  place  and  grove  worship  are  clearly  to  be  traced 
throughout  Polynesia.  The  grove  was  the  most  sacred  spot 
known  to  the  Maori ; it  was  rendered  especially  so  by  being 
used  as  a place  of  sepulture  for  their  chiefs,  and  not  only 
were  they  interred  amidst  its  trees,  but  even  on  stages  placed 
amongst  their  branches  and  in  their  hollow  trunks.  Some- 
times they  were  deposited  in  canoes,  elevated  on  poles,  as  if 
the  double  memory  of  the  grove  and  deluge  were  thus  pre- 
served. Even  the  living  in  trees,  as  still  practised  by  many 
tribes,  may  perhaps  be  traced  to  this  form  of  worship. 

One  connecting  link  between  the  American  and  the  an- 
cient black  race  is  seen  in  the  character  of  the  Mexican 
idols  and  altars,  on  which  the  serpent  is  sculptured  in  a most 
extraordinary  manner.  The  grand  altar,  exhumed  by  Mr. 
Bullock,  of  which  he  made  a cast,  was  almost  covered  with 
serpents,  writhing  about  in  every  possible  form,  and  clearly 
marked  the  character  of  their  worship.  That  even  there  the 
African  should  have  early  found  his  way  is  not  improbable. 
The  worship  of  evil  spirits  under  the  form  of  serpents  and 
reptiles  was  almost  universal  throughout  the  southern  hemis- 
phere. In  India  Krishna  is  represented  standing  on  a 
serpent  which  is  biting  his  heel,  and  he  as  bruising  the 
serpent's  head.  The  Mexicans,  like  the  Hindus,  kept  live 
serpents  as  household  gods.  Amongst  the  paintings  of  the 
Aztecs  found  in  Mexico,  two  have  been  preserved  by  M. 
Aglio,  in  which  a figure  is  drawn  smiting  a great  serpent 
on  the  head,  whilst  plate  74  of  the  Borgian  collection, 
represents  a figure  victoriously  smiting  the  serpent's  head, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  serpent  is  biting  his  heel.* 
A recent  hieroglyphic  from  Egypt  clearly  points  to  the 
quarter  from  whence  these  were  derived ; it  unmistakeably 
refers  to  the  serpent  tempting  our  first  parents. 

The  belief  is  evidently  as  ancient  as  the  time  of  Job,  that  the 
old  serpent,  the  devil,  afflicts  men  with  disease.  He  would 
thus  have  visited  Job  but  for  the  Lord  making  a hedge  about 
him  ; immediately  however,  that  for  a time  was  removed,  he 
afflicted  him  with  painful  boils,  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  to 
* Rev.  J.  Titcombe. 


48 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


the  crown  of  the  head.*  The  being  delivered  over  to  Satan 
appears  to  imply,  that  the  hedge  which  God  makes  around 
his  people  is  removed  from  those  who  renounce  his  worship, 
hence  the  serpent  reigns  supreme  over  the  heathen  world. 

In  China  the  dragon  is  the  sacred  emblem  of  the  nation, 
and  seems  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Aborigines  of  that 
country,  and  a proof  that  they  were  once  if  not  still  snake 
worshippers. 

Huge  reptiles  were  supposed  by  the  Maori  to  exist  in 
deep  bends  of  rivers  or  under  hills ; they  were  called  Tani- 
whas — men  who  were  drowned  were  said  to  be  pulled  under 
water  by  them  ; all  land  slips  and  avalanches  were  thought 
to  be  occasioned  by  them.  When  Te  Heuheu  the  head 
chief  of  Taupo  was  killed  by  a landslip,  with  near  sixty  of 
his  tribe,  he  attributed  the  approaching  destruction  to  his 
having  omitted  his  usual  offering  to  the  Taniwa,  and  the 
avalanche  overwhelmed  him  whilst  making  it. 

The  human  body  was  thought  to  be  apportioned  out  to 
these  reptiles ; each  part  of  it  being  under  the  separate 
dominion  of  one  of  them — the  head  under  one,  the  heart 
under  another,  the  breast,  the  limbs,  and  stomach  under 
others,  in  fact  every  inch  had  its  reptile ; thus  in  whatever 
part  the  pain  was  felt,  it  was  supposed  to  arise  from  the 
reptile  presiding  over  it,  and  their  most  potent  spells  and 
incantations  were  uttered  to  dislodge  the  evil  spirit.  Reptile 
gods  were  considered  the  most  ancient. 

Serpent  worship  therefore  may  truly  be  said  to  have  en- 
circled the  southern  hemisphere,  and  presents  a strong  point 
of  connection  between  all  the  various  races  which  are  found 
in  it;  for  although  it  first  originated  with  the  black  race, 
when  it  succumbed  to  the  more  powerful  succeeding  ones, 
they  gradually  adopted  and  incorporated  it  in  their  religious 
institutions,  and  may  not  this  worship  be  traced  up  to  the 
earliest  period  when  man  fell  and  his  degenerate  posterity 
worshipped  through  fear  the  being  by  whom  they  were 
overcome. 

India  presents  many  points  of  agreement  with  Polynesia, 

* Job,  chap.  ii.  6,  7. 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


49 


both  in  customs  and  language,  this  applies  to  its  Aboriginal 
races  still  existing,  as  also  to  their  Hindu  conquerors. 

Ludlow  in  his  history  of  India,  notices  some  of  the  remark- 
able points  of  difference  between  the  Aboriginal  tribes  and 
the  Hindus,  which  also  apply  to  the  Maori,  and  prove  a close 
resemblance  between  them. 

1 . The  Hindus  were  divided  into  castes,  the  Aboriginal  races 
were  not ; this  was  the  case  with  the  Maori ; they  had,  it  is 
true,  three  orders — chiefs,  toh ungas  or  priests,  and  slaves  ; but 
chiefs  were  by  birth  arikis,  or  high  priests,  and  also  tohungas 
or  inferior  ones,  according  to  their  fancied  powers  in  spiritual 
matters,  and  the  priests  were  often  chiefs  and  warriors ; even 
the  slaves  might  be  turned  into  chiefs  and  priests  if  perceived 
to  have  abilities  to  fit  them  for  either  one  or  the  other. 

2.  Hindu  widows  were  not  allowed  to  marry : with  the  abo- 
rigines they  were  the  property  of  the  younger  brother  of  the 
late  husband.  This  was  also  the  custom  in  New  Zealand, 
unless  the  widows  strangled  themselves,  which  was  more 
frequently  the  case,  like  the  Hindu  widow  who  immolated 
herself  on  the  funeral  pile  of  her  husband.  The  Maori  head 
chief  frequently  claimed  a right  over  widows,  disposing  of 
them  to  the  best  bidder,  but  in  general  they  belonged  to  the 
brother  of  the  deceased. 

3.  The  Hindu  venerated  the  cow,  and  abstained  from 
eating  flesh.  The  others  feed  on  everything  without  dis- 
tinction ; so  also  the  Maori. 

4.  The  Hindu  abhors  the  shedding  of  blood ; the  other 
conceives  no  religious  or  domestic  ceremony  complete  with- 
out blood  and  the  offering  of  a live  victim.  This  also  was 
general  throughout  Polynesia,  even  houses  were  dedicated 
with  the  sacrifice  of  human  life  ; their  altars  were  stained 
with  blood,  and  their  recklessness  of  life  was  astonishing. 

5.  The  Hindus  have  a Bhraminical  priesthood,  the  others 
have  their  own  self-created  priests,  who  are  respected  ac- 
cording to  their  skill  in  magic  and  sorcery,  in  divining  future 
events  and  curing  diseases ; this  was  precisely  the  same  with 
the  Polynesian. 

6.  The  Hindus  burn  their  dead,  the  others  bury  them  with 


50 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


their  arms,  sometimes  their  cattle,  a victim  having  to  be 
sacrificed  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  the  deceased.  This  was 
usually  the  case  with  the  Polynesian  chiefs;  they  were 
buried  with  all  their  valuable  property,  their  weapons, 
jewels,  garments,  and  slaves  were  sacrificed  to  bear  them 
company  and  wait  upon  them. 

7.  The  Aborigines  are  snake  worshippers.  The  Nagas, 
the  Polynesian,  and  especially  the  Melanesian,  were  the  same. 

8.  The  Indian  Aborigines  pay  religious  reverence  to  stones, 
trees,  or  stumps,  so  likewise  the  Polynesian  and  Mela- 
nesian. 

9.  The  one,  although  Polytheists  are  not  idolaters,  like 
the  Hindus  ; so  also  the  Maori,  although  they  had  a kind  of 
idol  which  the  priest  carried,  still  it  was  not  worshipped,  but 
addressed  as  a visible  representation  of  their  gods,  whose 
enmity  they  tried  to  conquer  by  the  utterance  of  their  most 
powerful  spells  and  incantations. 

10.  Indian  Aborigines  are  generally  devil  worshippers,  so 
also  the  Maori. 

In  addition  to  these,  there  are  other  resemblances  to  be 
noticed.  The  Mundane  egg  of  the  one  is  to  be  traced  in  the 
mythology  of  the  other.  In  the  Hindu  myth,  the  Mundane 
egg  was  placed  in  the  sea,  where  it  burst  asunder;  so  with 
the  Maori,  the  two  parts,  earth  and  heaven,  were  severed, 
and  from  the  sea  everything  proceeded,  Maui  thence  drew 
up  the  earth. 

No  traces  of  idolatry  are  to  be  found  in  the  most  ancient 
of  the  Indian  writings,  the  Rigveda;  none  in  Maori  traditions. 
The  chief  God  of  the  Indian  Aborigines,  Rudra,  resembles 
in  name  the  Maori  God  Rehua,  who  dwelt  in  the  highest 
of  their  ten  heavens. 

Major  Macpherson  states  : — 

1.  Amongst  the  Khonds,  when  a village  begins  to  decay, 
it  is  not  repaired,  but  a new  one  built  on  a different  site,  and 
none  of  the  old  materials  are  used.  A Khond  village  lasts 
on  an  average  fourteen  years.  This  is  precisely  the  same 
amongst  the  Maories,  they  never  repair  their  houses  or  even 
their  churches,  however  good  the  buildings  may  be,  and 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


51 


their  villages  seldom  have  a longer  existence  than  those  of 
the  Khonds. 

2.  Marriages  are  celebrated  with  mock  battles  and  the 
appearance  of  forcible  abduction ; this  also  was  the  old 
practice  in  New  Zealand. 

3.  Children  are  named  on  the  eighth  day  after  the  Bnkono 
has  pronounced  what  ancestor  has  sent  it.  The  Maori  to- 
hunga  repeated  a long  list  of  ancestral  names,,  and  if  the 
child  sneezed,  cried,  or  made  any  movement  whilst  a name 
was  being  pronounced  that  was  the  one  selected. 

4.  Each  tribe  is  presided  over  by  a patriarch,  who  is  the 
representative  of  a common  ancestor ; the  tribe  is  divided 
into  several  branches,  which  are  ruled  by  their  family 
head ; this  also  is  the  same  with  the  Maori ; the  patriarch  is 
called  an  ariki,  being  both  priest  and  chief ; the  tribes  are 
divided  into  hapus,  and  likened  to  the  branches  of  the  cala- 
bash, all  being  under  the  family  head. 

5.  In  war  the  first  man  who  returned  unwounded  after 
having  slain  his  foe,  struck  off  the  right  arm,  and  carried  it 
to  the  priest,  who  bore  it  away  as  an  offering  to  Loha  Pennu 
in  his  grove ; so  in  New  Zealand,  the  scalp  or  liver  of  the 
first  slain  was  given  to  the  priest,  who  carried  it  to  his  Tuahu 
in  the  sacred  grove,  as  an  offering  to  Maru  the  god  of  war. 

6.  Man  at  first  had  power  to  move  not  only  on  the 
earth  but  through  the  air  and  sea.  In  Maori  myth  men 
were  formerly  endowed  with  similar  powers. 

7.  Naturally  there  is  no  death;  this  was  also  the  Maori 
idea.  Formerly  a kind  of  inquest  was  held  to  ascertain  who 
had  caused  the  death,  by  enchantment,  witchcraft,  or  sor- 
cery, and  the  seer  being  consulted,  mentioned  some  one’s 
name,  who  was  sought  for  and  put  to  death. 

8.  Inferior  gods,  as  Nadzu  Pennu,  who  presided  over  vil- 
lages, Soro  Pennu  over  hills,  Jori  Pennu  over  streams,  Idzn 
Pennu  over  families  or  houses,  Moonda  Pennu  over  tanks, 
Jooga  Pennu  over  fountains,  Gossa  Pennu  over  forests, 
and  Kootti  Pennu  over  ravines.  The  Maori  also  had  a great 
number  of  inferior  gods  presiding  over  forests,  lakes,  rivers, 
mountains,  and  all  departments  of  nature. 

e 2 


52 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


9.  Dinga  Pennu  resides  upon  a great  rock  or  mountain, 
called  Grippa  Valli,  or  leaping  rock,  in  the  region  beyond 
the  sea  from  which  the  sun  rises ; the  leaping  rock  is  per- 
fectly smooth  and  exceedingly  slippery,  with  a black  un- 
fathomless river  flowing  around  it,  to  it  the  souls  of  men 
speed  straight  after  death,  and  it  derives  its  name  from  the 
desperate  leaps  which  they  are  compelled  to  make,  to  reach 
and  secure  a footing  upon  its  surface,  which  they  con- 
stantly fail  to  do ; with  the  Maori,  their  Reinga  is  a rock 
with  an  extremely  narrow  ridge  leading  to  it,  situated  at  the 
northern  extremity  of  New  Zealand ; this  is  the  road  the 
spirits  of  the  dead  have  to  travel  along  to  reach  the  infernal 
regions;  from  the  top  of  that  rock  they  leap  into  Po,  or 
Hades,  hence  it  derives  its  name  Te  Being  a,  the  leaping 
place. 

10.  They  have  groves,  which  are  kept  sacred  from  the 
axe,  hoary  rocks,  the  tops  of  hills,  fountains,  and  banks  of 
streams,  which  are  in  their  eyes  the  fittest  places  for  worship. 
The  sacred  grove  was  found  throughout  New  Zealand,  sacred 
rocks  and  trees  as  well,  to  which  every  traveller  uttered  a 
prayer,  and  left  behind  some  memento  of  his  visit. 

1 1 . One  of  the  chief  offices  of  a priest  is  to  discover  the 
cause  of  sickness,  which  is  held  to  arise  from  the  decree  of 
Dinga,  from  the  especial  displeasure  of  some  god,  or  from 
the  magical  arts  of  an  enemy.  It  was  exactly  the  same  with 
the  Maori. 

12.  The  priest  becomes  full  of  the  god,  shakes  his  head 
wildly  with  dishevelled  hair,  and  pours  forth  a torrent  of 
incoherent  words.  The  Maori  priest  did  the  same,  foaming 
at  the  mouth  and  distorting  his  body  in  a most  extraordi- 
nary manner ; the  words  he  uttered  whilst  in  that  state  were 
considered  to  come  from  the  god. 

13.  We  are  told  by  Mouhot,  who  passed  some  time 
amongst  the  Stiens,  the  wild  mountaineers  of  Siam,  that 
they  believe  in  an  evil  genius,  and  attribute  all  diseases  to 
him ; if  any  one  be  suffering  from  illness,  they  say  it  is  the 
demon  tormenting  him,  and  with  this  idea  they  make  all 
night  and  day  an  insupportable  noise  round  the  patient. 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


53 


Amongst  the  Maori  it  was  thought  the  body  was  held  posses- 
sion of  by  a legion  of  demons,  and  noise  also  was  a remedy 
with  them. 

14.  Meru,  and  Kopung  Meru,  are  gods  of  the  Khond 
tribes ; Meru  is  both  the  name  of  a Maori  god  and  of  a 
region  in  hades.  In  the  Sandwich  Islands,  Milu  or  Meru  is 
the  king  of  hades  ; it  also  figures  in  Egyptian  mythology. 

15.  Every  village  or  cluster  of  hamlets  has  its  grove 
sacred  to  the  god  of  war ; it  was  precisely  the  same  with  the 
Maori. 

These  are  remarkable  coincidences  between  races  situated 
so  wide  apart,  and  indicate  an  ancient  connection  between 
them ; there  are  others  also  which  might  be  mentioned — 
such  as  human  sacrifice,  infanticide,  &c. 

The  Khonds  of  Orissa  have  a complete  religious  system, 
acknowledging  a self-existent  Being,  the  source  of  good,  the 
creator  of  all  things  and  persons,  who  is  termed  the  God  of 
light  or  the  sun  god.  Boora  Pennu,  or  Bella  Pennu,  his 
first  creation  and  consort,  was  the  earth  goddess ; Tari 
Pennu  the  source  of  evil,  who,  having  been  jealous  of  Boora 
Pennu^s  intention  to  create  man  for  happiness,  and  for  the 
creators  service,  endeavoured  to  frustrate  this  creation,  and 
failing  to  do  so,  spoiled  it  by  the  introduction  of  both  phy- 
sical and  moral  evil.* 

Boora,  as  pronounced  by  a Maori,  would  be  Pu-ra,  perfect 
lights  i.  e.}  the  sun,  and  Pennu  altogether.  In  Maori  mytho- 
logy, Bangi  the  heaven  was  the  husband  of  Papa,  the  earth, 
and  their  offspring  were  the  first-born  of  the  world. 

India  must  be  viewed  as  one  of  the  grand  paths  traversed 
by  the  earliest  migrations  on  their  way  to  the  Pacific,  and 
they  have  left  their  footprints  wherever  they  have  gone. 
Nor  must  several  resemblances  to  the  Hebrews  be  allowed 
to  pass  unnoticed;  mention  is  only  made  of  the  striking 
personal  likeness  which  the  Polynesian  bears  to  the  Jew, 
but  there  are  others  which  are  more  worthy  of  notice. 

1 . The  Hebrews  had  no  names  for  days,  only  distinguishing 
them  as  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd,  4th,  5th,  6th,  and  7th.  Their  days 

* Ludlow’s  British  India , vol.  i.  p.  26. 


54 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


were  measured  from  evening  to  evening.  In  tlie  first  chapter 
of  Genesis  it  is  said,  “ the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the 
first  day,”  thus  appearing  to  count  days  by  the  nights. 
This  was  the  case  with  the  Polynesians,  they  counted  by 
nights,  but  instead  of  having  an  hebdomadal  division  they 
had  a monthly  one,  or,  perhaps,  might  be  said  to  count  by 
four  sevens.  They  had  names  for  the  twenty-eight  nights 
of  the  moon,  the  night  of  the  full  moon  being  he  Atua}  God. 
The  names  of  the  nights  varied  even  in  Hew  Zealand  as  also 
amongst  the  Polynesians,  still  all  counted  time  in  the  same 
way. 

2.  The  Hebrew  months  also  were  lunar,  like  those  of  the 
Maori. 

3.  The  moon  was  more  regarded  than  the  sun;  it  regu- 
lated all  their  festivals  and  fasts.  This,  as  far  as  is  known, 
is  the  same  throughout  Polynesia. 

4.  The  new  moon  was  celebrated  by  trumpets  and  especial 
sacrifice  in  the  temple.  The  only  approach  to  a festival 
amongst  the  Maori  was,  when  the  new  moon  first  appeared. 
The  women  assembled  and  bewailed  those  who  had  died 
since  the  last  one,  uttering  the  following  lament : (C  Alas ! 
alas  ! thou,  O moon,  hast  returned  to  life,  but  our  departed 
beloved  ones  have  not.  Thou  hast  bathed  in  the  living 
water  of  Tane,  and  had  thy  life  renewed,  but  there  has  been 
no  fountain  of  living  water  to  restore  life  to  our  departed 
ones.  Alas  ! alas  ! ” 

The  dead  were  lamented  by  professional  mourners  ; wailing 
for  the  dead  is  also  a Maori  practice. 

Another  race  remains  to  be  briefly  alluded  to,  more  par- 
ticularly belonging  to  the  north  western  parts  of  Polynesia, 
which  includes  the  natives  of  the  Fiji  Islands  to  the  west,  and 
the  Samoan  group  to  the  east.  The  range  of  this  race  may 
be  said  to  extend  from  New  Caledonia  in  the  south,  to  the 
Solomon  Isles  in  the  north,  and  even  still  further.  Its 
characteristic  marks  are  the  colour  of  the  hair  and  skin ; 
the  former  being  of  a decidedly  reddish  hue,  frizzly  and 
crisp,  not  woolly.  The  men  wear  their  hair  in  a singular 
way,  each  separate  lock  being  bound  up  with  a fine  string 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


55 


from  its  roots  nearly  to  its  termination,  leaving  a small  tuft 
at  the  top ; as  it  grows  longer  the  bandage  is  continued  still 
higher  up,  at  last  it  becomes  nearly  a foot  long ; by  these 
means  the  hair  stands  up  erect,  and  forms  a huge  mass, 
which  is  impervious  to  the  rays  of  even  a tropical  sun, 
so  that  no  other  covering  for  the  head  is  required.  To 
preserve  this  elaborately  manipulated  head-dress  unin- 
jured at  night,  the  neck  rests  on  a narrow  wooden  pillow, 
formed  to  suit  its  shape,  which  is  sometimes  made  of  a joint 
of  bamboo,  to  which  legs  are  attached,  thus  converting  it 
into  a kind  of  low  stool,  some  five  or  six  inches  high.  The 
hair  being  of  a light  reddish  colour,  and  thus  standing  up, 
gives  the  natives  a singular  appearance. 

Hood,  the  writer  of  the  “ Cruise  of  the  Fawn  ” alludes  to 
the  way  the  hair  is  worn  at  IJea  or  Wallis  Island  : — 

u The  women  with  their  frizzled  heads  of  hair,  all  squared 
at  the  bottom,  put  me  in  mind  of  the  figures  depicted  upon 
the  Nineveh  marbles.  In  some  of  the  islands  to  the  west- 
ward, they  have  a way  of  dressing  it  in  a multitude  of  little 
ringlets,  twisted  with  fine  cocoa-nut  twine,  and  the  men 
have  their  beards  arranged  in  the  same  manner,  also  cut 
square,  giving  them  almost  identically  the  same  appearance 
with  the  Assyrian  figures/’* 

The  Malay  figure  is  not  to  be  recognized  in  New  Zealand. 
The  finest  men  have  an  unmistakeable  Jewish  caste  of 
features,  high  foreheads  and  aquiline  noses ; the  next  have  a 
Chinese  or  Tartar  countenance,  and  the  last,  that  of  the 
Negretto,  more  slightly  formed  than  the  negro,  still  having 
his  facial  line  with  a chocolate-coloured  skin,  and  frizzled 
rather  than  woolly  hair. 

The  colour  of  the  Maori  varies ; in  the  north  and  extreme 
south  they  are  the  darkest,  and  not  so  well  formed  as  those 
inhabiting  the  centre  of  the  island.  Some  of  the  tribes  are 
as  fair  as  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese,  and  many  shades 
lighter  than  in  other  parts  of  Polynesia. 

The  American  natives  are  remarkably  destitute  of  hair  ■ 
they  have  little  or  no  beard,  and  only  hair  on  the  head ; the 

* Cruise  of  the  Fawn,  p.  ioi. 


56 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


Maori  in  this  respect  resembles  the  European,  and  rivals 
him  in  the  luxuriance  of  his  beard. 

Most  Aborigines  have  black  hair,  and  that  either  straight 
or  frizzly ; the  American  has  the  former ; the  natives  of 
the  Fiji  and  other  isles  the  latter.  In  New  Zealand  the 
straight  and  black  predominate,  although  some  have  wavy 
and  curly,  but  almost  every  kind  may  be  met  with,  the 
auburn,  flaxen,  and  rich  reddish  brown. 

The  Maori  has  a name  for  every  kind  of  hair.  The  frizzly, 
called  maweti;  matted  hum,  straight  maliora,  red  kehu,  or 
rarauhe , auburn  mdkekehu,  slightly  curled  jpiki,  silken  ngaore} 
curly  huruwati , flaxen  rukehu , black  pango,  grey  hina.  The 
Korakorako,  or  Albino,  has  generally  red  sandy  hair,  red 
complexion  and  red  or  blue  eyes. 

The  Malay  can  scarcely  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the 
Pacific,-  their  range  being  chiefly  confined  to  the  Indian 
Archipelago.  They  are  not  so  well  built  or  so  tall  in 
general  as  the  Polynesian,  but  more  wiry  in  form,  and, 
perhaps,  more  active  in  their  movements.  By  many 
they  are  supposed  to  have  peopled  the  south  seas ; the 
chief  reason  for  this  opinion  seems  to  arise  from  the  re- 
semblance which  a few  of  their  words  bear  to  those  of  the 
Polynesian  tongue,  but  there  are  probably  quite  as  many 
European  ones,  which  are  identical  with  them,  as  Malayan ; 
and  the  same  reason  may  be  assigned  that  both  have  de- 
rived them  from  a common  source,  and  in  fact,  the  same 
may  be  said  of  the  western  coast  of  America,  both  with 
regard  to  manners  and  customs  as  well  as  words. 

There  appears,  therefore,  to  be  one  grand  conclusion 
arrived  at  on  this  deeply  interesting  subject  of  inquiry, 
which  is,  that  the  Pacific  has  been  chiefly  peopled  by  two 
races,  the  Melanesian  and  Polynesian,  although  others  have 
conti ibuted  to  do  so  in  a smaller  degree.  That  the  Melane- 
sian was  by  far  the  most  ancient  of  the  two ; and  both 
entered  the  Pacific  from  contrary  directions ; that  whenever 
they  came  into  contact  with  each  other,  the  lighter  coloured 
subdued  and  dominated  over  the  other. 

The  black  arrived  from  the  west;  they  may  be  clearly 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


57 


traced  through  Australia  and  New  Zealand  towards  the  south, 
and  through  India,  with  its  islands,  also  China,  Japan,  the 
Philippines,  and  all  those  islands  composing  the  Indian 
Archipelago,  until  by  New  Guinea  and  New  Caledonia  they 
entered  the  Pacific. 

There  is  much  reason  to  suppose  that  the  original  start- 
ing point  of  this  race  was  from  Egypt.  The  Australian 
native  thence  drew  his  boomerang  and  derived  his  mystic 
rites.  The  other  sections  of  this  family  long  preserved 
connecting  links  with  their  ancient  parent  land,  which 
were  gradually  lost  as  they  receded  from  it,  until  they 
reached  the  shores  of  New  Zealand  in  the  rudely  fire-hol- 
lowed log,  similar  to  those  their  Australian  congeners  still 
use.  They  obtained  a precarious  subsistence  from  hunting, 
fishing,  and  the  indigenous  products  of  the  soil,  without 
having  any  idea  of  agriculture,  building  wretched  huts  for 
shelter,  and  scarcely  having  any  garment  to  shield  them 
from  the  winter’s  cold. 

The  Polynesian,  on  the  other  hand,  appears  to  have  en- 
tered the  Pacific  from  the  eastern  shores  of  Asia ; he  has 
left  his  footmarks  along  the  entire  length  of  the  western 
coasts  of  North  and  South  America,  as  far  as  the  ocean 
currents  allowed,  but  where  they  swept  from  the  American 
shores  to  the  west,  there  the  traces  of  his  abode  are  lost. 
The  relics  of  his  progress  are  to  be  discerned  in  language, 
religion,  manners,  and  customs,  but  especially  in  the  build- 
ings he  erected,  the  ruins  of  cities,  the  sculptures,  temples, 
pyramids,  raised  on  the  many  isles  he  visited ; these  not 
only  mark  his  presence  but  likewise  bear  testimony  to  the 
civilization  he  once  possessed.  These  traces  gradually  be- 
come less  and  less  distinct,  until  in  New  Zealand  the  sacred 
grove  became  almost  the  sole  landmark  he  has  left,  though 
he  brought  with  him  other  remains  of  his  former  civilization. 
He  came  in  his  gaily-ornamented  canoe,  tastefully  decorated 
with  carving,  paint  and  feathers  ; he  brought  with  him 
double  canoes,  decked  over,  with  houses  erected  upon  them. 
As  an  agriculturist,  he  brought  with  him  the  plants  which 
he  had  previously  cultivated ; the  arum,  the  sweet  potatoe. 


58 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


and  calabash,  with  the  seeds  of  the  karaka.  The  houses  he 
built  marked  how  far  superior  he  was  to  the  race  supplanted ; 
and  yet  that  race,  low  as  it  had  sunk,  once  owned  a civili- 
zation equal  to  his  own. 

The  Teocalli  of  America,  the  Marae  of  the  islands, 
seem  to  point  to  Egypt  as  the  spot  from  whence  they  were 
derived ; the  fact  of  so  many  Polynesian  words  being  iden- 
tical with  Egyptian  ones,  as  translated  from  ancient  hierogly- 
phics, and  that  their  axes  and  hoes  were  the  same  with  those 
of  the  Maori,  both  remarkable  for  their  peculiar  form,  is 
most  singular. 

How  strange  are  such  resemblances  ! Can  it  be  possible  that 
those  two  migratory  races,  so  dissimilar  in  form  and  colour, 
both  started  from  the  same  spot,  one  branching  off  to  India 
and  its  isles,  thus  reaching  Australia ; the  other,  after  a long 
interval,  by  Central  Asia,  reaching  America  and  Polynesia 
in  one  direction,  and  India  in  another,  there  overcoming 
the  other,  and  that  at  last  both  should  again  meet  in  the 
Pacific  ! In  reality,  however,  it  is  no  more  strange  that  they 
should  do  so,  than  that  the  Gipsey  should  find  his  way  from  the 
sultry  plains  of  India  to  the  far- distant  isles  of  Britain ; or 
that  our  own  race  should  have  previously  done  the  same, 
and  that  the  white  too,  like  the  black  and  brown  sections  of 
the  human  family,  should  have  found  their  way  at  three 
different  epochs  of  time  to  the  same  southern  shores,  and 
that  there  the  three  grand  divisions  of  men  should  meet 
together  to  occupy  the  same  lands  and  form  one  people. 

Hoes  not  this  prove  that  the  innate  energy  of  man  is  equally 
evinced  by  each ; and  that  wherever  he  is  found,  in  whatever 
circumstances  he  may  be  placed,  he  is  virtually  the  same. 
The  Christian  must  take  a still  higher  view,  and  regard 
all  these  wanderings  of  the  different  sections  of  the  human 
family,  as  being  ordered  in  infinite  wisdom  to  accomplish 
the  grand  designs  of  the  Almighty. 

The  division  of  time  into  weeks  is  general  wherever  Chris- 
tianity has  reached,  and  even  where  it  has  not.  In  Egypt, 
Asia  in  general,  India  and  China,  it  marks  the  influence 
of  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  The  absence  of  this  amongst 


THE  TWO  RACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


59 


the  Polynesians  is  another  proof  of  their  long  isolation  from 
the  rest  of  the  world.  The  New  Zealanders,  in  common 
with  the  rest  of  their  race,  divide  time  by  lunar  months  and 
count  by  nights.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  old  way  even 
in  Britain ; we  still  say  sennight,  the  seventh  night,  and  fort- 
night the  fourteenth  night.  The  Maori  measured  seasons  by 
the  rising  of  stars.  The  first  moon  after  the  appearing  of 
Puanga  is  the  beginning  of  the  new  year ; this  is  in  June.* 

The  testimony  of  Sir  S.  Baker,  the  discoverer  of  the  Nile, 
in  behalf  of  the  negro  is  : “ In  infancy  and  childhood  their 
intelligence  was  equal,  if  not  superior  to  that  of  Euro- 
peans, but  at  twelve  or  fourteen  the  intellectual  capacity 
appeared  to  have  lost  its  powers  of  further  development/5 
This  testimony  is  most  important,  as  it  establishes  the  fact 
of  there  being  no  primary  or  inherent  inferiority  of  mind  in 
the  negro ; he  begins  life  equal  if  not  superior  to  the  Euro- 
pean, but  he  falls  off  as  he  advances  in  age.  Is  not  this 
easily  to  be  accounted  for,  just  at  that  period  when  artificial 
aid  is  called  in  to  carry  on  the  mind  of  the  European,  the 
negro  is  left  to  struggle  unaided,  with  all  the  antagonism  ot 
savage  life.  The  youthful  intellect  of  the  African  by  twelve, 
grasps  all  that  his  parents  can  have  to  teach,  and  is  then 
hurried  away  into  all  the  realities  of  his  uncivilized  state ; at 
that  point  when  civilization  steps  in,  and  education  supplies 
the  means  of  further  strengthening  and  drawing  out  the 
mind  of  the  European,  the  African  is  only  being  instructed 
in  all  the  evils  of  heathen  life,  which  must  quench  or  stop 
the  further  growth  of  mind. 

It  is  true  our  Maori  children  also  seem  to  be  as  precocious 
as  the  European,  and  to  make  equal  advancement  in  our 
schools  during  their  early  years  and  then  stand  still ; but 
this  is  to  be  accounted  for,  by  their  being  too  early  called 
away  to  the  duties  of  life,  the  same  as  it  is  with  our  own 

* That  the  human  mind  is  equally  capable  of  expansion  to  whatever  section 
of  the  “race  it  belongs,”  is  seen  by  the  progress  it  made  in  Mexico.  That 
they  should  have  observed  the  passing  of  the  sun  in  the  zenith  of  Mexico  shows, 
that  such  observations  could  only  have  been  made  originally  in  countries  situ- 
ated between  the  tropics.  First  they  decided  the  year  to  be  360  days,  then 
365,  and  finally  365 \...*Tke  Great  Deserts  of  America,  vol.  i.  p.  129. 


60 


THE  TWO  EACES  WHICH  PEOPLED  POLYNESIA. 


lower  classes,  those  only  who  remain  continue  to  have  their 
intellect  expanded.  The  children  of  the  poor  are  as  natu- 
rally lively,  witty  and  shrewd,  as  those  of  the  rich,  but  as 
they  grow  up,  when  the  treatment  of  each  changes,  then 
also  the  mental  difference  becomes  more  apparent ; still 
with  all  these  disadvantages  the  Negro  and  Maori  will  bear 
comparison  with  many  who  have  not  been  subjected  to  them. 
Sir  S.  Baker  also  bears  testimony  to  their  skill : “ They 
possessed  the  art  of  smelting  iron,  and  although  having  only 
a stone  for  an  anvil,  another  for  a hammer,  and  a cleft  stick 
for  a pair  of  tongs,  he  had  seen,  a rude  shirt  of  mail  made 
for  the  chief  by  the  native  blacksmith.”  Surely,  with  such 
imperfect  means,  it  would  puzzle  many  of  our  artificers  to 
hammer  out  anything  of  the  kind.  So  with  the  Maori,  the 
natural  powers  of  his  intellect  are  seen  in  the  facility  with 
which  he  effects  all  he  needs. 

Let  each  section  of  the  human  family  possess  similar  means 
of  instruction,  and  the  results  will  be  much  the  same.  Even 
in  Australia  the  native  children  at  the  Wellington  Valley 
mission  station  could  read  a chapter  of  the  English  Testament 
without  foreign  accent,  and  answer  as  many  questions  as 
children  in  general  would  do  in  our  Sunday  schools ; and 
Samuel  Crowther,  the  once  ignorant  and  degraded  African 
slave,  by  education,  has  become  the  Christian  gentleman  and 
scholar,  and  is  now  a highly  useful  and  esteemed  bishop, 
labouring  in  the  wilds  of  Africa,  to  raise  his  benighted 
countrymen  by  the  same  means  he  rose  himself. 


A WELSH  CORACLE. 


FROM  THE  TEMPLE  OF  PHILCE. 


CHAPTER  III. 

OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 

The  why  and  the  wherefore  form  one  of  the  characteristic 
inquiries  of  the  age  we  live  in.  Man  is  no  longer  satisfied 
to  take  the  world  as  he  finds  it  ; he  must  know  how  it 
became  what  it  is — through  what  changes,  alterations,  con- 
vulsions, it  has  passed  before  it  acquired  its  present  state.  So 
with  organic  matter.  How  did  life  first  arise  on  the  naked 
and  barren  surface  of  the  globe  ? — how  did  it  increase,  until 
the  present  varied  orders  of  animal  and  vegetable  existence 
clothed  and  beautified  its  surface. 

Recent  as  is  the  consideration  of  our  own  race  and  its  origin, 
it  has  almost  become  the  study  of  the  day.  It  is  indeed 
a subject  of  the  deepest  interest  to  us,  and  one  which  must 
continue  to  increase  in  the  same  degree  that  the  human 
mind  becomes  enlarged.  The  chief  sources  of  information 
which  we  have  to  draw  upon  in  this  enquiry  are  : — First, 
human  speculations ; second,  geological  evidence ; third. 
Scripture  records.  In  reference  to  the  first,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  refer  to  any  of  the  traditions  and  heathen 
myths  of  old,  nor  yet  to  those  of  the  present  day.  The 


62 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


Hindu  and  Chinese  have  each  peculiar  traditions  of  their 
origin,  and  so  likewise  have  the  Maori,  which  are  no 
more  puerile  than  those  of  other  heathen  nations  ; but  none 
of  them  offer  anything  to  satisfy  the  enquiring  mind  as  to 
the  origin  of  his  species. 

We  turn,  then,  at  once  to  the  speculations  of  the  present 
age.  In  “ The  Vestiges  of  the  Creation,”  a work  embodying 
the  opinions  of  a large  number  of  our  modern  philoso- 
phers, we  find  the  theory  of  development  advocated ; that 
animal  life  commenced  with  the  simplest  form ; that  the 
protozoa  was  a pure  gelatinous  substance,  such  as  is  often 
seen  on  our  shores.  By  some  means  or  other — the  way  is 
not  very  clearly  explained — this  jelly,  from  being  so  con- 
stantly cast  up  on  dry  land,  gradually  acquired  the  power  of 
living  upon  it,  and  thus  by  degrees  changed  its  nature  ; and, 
advancing  to  something  else  in  the  course  of  myriads  of 
ages,  passed  from  one  form  to  another,  until  at  last  from 
the  monkey  emerged  the  man  ; and  in  the  gorilla  we  are 
taught  to  behold  one  of  our  grand  progenitors. 

It  is  said  to  be  a point  of  difficulty  to  define  the  difference 
between  man  and  the  ape.  The  following  remarks  made  by 
a celebrated  anatomist  are  intended  to  decide  the  question  : 
“ The  brain  of  an  adult  man  is  similar  to  that  of  an  ape ; 
and,  nevertheless,  it  is  developed  in  some  respects  in  an  en- 
tirely different  manner.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  folds  in  the 
brain  of  an  ape  appear  first  in  the  inferior  lobes,  and  lastly 
in  the  frontal  ones.  In  man,  the  inverse  of  this  takes  place, 
the  frontal  folds  are  the  first  to  appear.  From  this  result 
perpetual  differences  during  foetal  life,  and  man,  in  this 
respect,  presents  an  irresolvable  exception  to  the  general 
rule.  Thus  at  no  epoch  is  this  human  brain,  typically  so  like 
an  ape,  actually  an  ape’s  brain.  One  can  make  of  a material 
man,  neither  a kingdom,  a division,  a class,  an  order,  nor  a 
family  of  an  order.  He  is  apart  from  the  beings  which  most 
resemble  him.  He  appears,  pardon  the  expression,  to  the 
eyes  of  the  naturalist,  who  would  class  him  with  the  apes,  as 
an  anomaly.” 

There  appears  to  be  another  striking  peculiarity  in  the 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


63 


skull  of  the  ape,  which  presents  a more  evident  and  marked 
distinction  between  it  and  man.  The  central  ridge  of  the 
ape  is  totally  wanting  in  that  of  man,  even  of  the  lowest 
type ; this  ridge  is  very  prominent  in  the  skull  of  the  gorilla, 
and  marks  its  affinity  to  the  dog  rather  than  to  man,  which 
is  further  strengthened  by  its  large  canine  teeth  ; this  struck 
the  naturalist  Pliny,  who  therefore  named  the  ape,  Cyno- 
cephalus. 

But  whatever  may  be  the  bodily  resemblance  between 
man  and  other  creatures, — and  it  must  be  allowed  there  is 
some, — for  being  the  last  and  most  perfect  of  all  formed,  his 
animal  frame  may  be  said  to  incorporate  parts  of  every  other 
to  give  him  that  distinction.  The  true  difference  between 
man  and  the  beast  is  to  be  sought  for  in  the  mind  rather  than 
in  the  body. 

The  animal  is  said  to  be  endowed  with  instinct,  by  which 
it  is  led  to  select  its  food  and  avoid  danger ; but  it  may  be 
safely  granted  to  possess  even  more  than  this,  a certain 
amount  of  mind,  an  inferior  degree  of  reason,  which  leads  it 
to  reflect  on  what  more  immediately  concerns  its  safety, 
though  it  cannot  direct  thought  beyond  itself.  But  how 
different  is  it  with  man ; he  can  raise  his  mind  to  far  higher 
objects,  and  embrace  the  whole  universe  in  his  reflections, 
thus  displaying  an  intimate  connection  even  with  Deity  it- 
self. 

In  the  struggle  for  life,  general  experience  proves  that  the 
most  perfect  forms  survive,  whilst  the  malformed  perish  ; 
there  may  be,  it  is  true,  exceptions,  where  the  imperfection 
does  not  injure  the  natural  strength  of  the  individual,  but 
it  is  not  probable  even  in  this  case  that  it  will  perpetuate 
its  peculiarity ; the  strongest  forms  being  the  most  perfect, 
live  to  produce  similar  ones  to  their  own.  Darwin,  on 
“ Species,”  accounts  for  this  transmutation  of  form  by 
what  he  calls  “ natural  selection,”  and  " struggle  for  life.” 

However  many  and  great  may  be  the  varieties  obtained  of 
the  pigeon,  the  changes  which  the  dog  has  undergone  are 
far  more  remarkable ; yet  it  is  generally  allowed  by  the 
zoologist  that  all  have  originally  sprung  from  one.  Whether 


64 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


we  compare  the  size,  external  form,  shape  of  skull,  or  diverse 
habits,  the  dog  is  a striking  proof  of  what  alterations  they 
are  capable  of  undergoing — the  large  hairy  Newfoundland, 
the  delicate  Italian  greyhound,  and  hairless  dogs  of  India, 
the  bold  bulldog,  the  timid  poodle,  the  spaniel  delighting  in 
water,  the  pointer  which  will  not  enter  it.  Their  habits  too,  so 
diverse,  the  natural  instinct  of  one  being  to  point,  of  another 
to  carry,  one  to  guard,  another  to  assemble  and  watch  over 
what  has  been  entrusted  to  it ; and  yet,  with  all  these  varie- 
ties, the  genus  canis  is  still  the  same.  We  cannot  mistake  it 
any  more  than  we  can  the  pigeon,  with  all  its  artificial 
changes. 

By  close  observation  of  the  pigeon,  and  noticing  the  many 
and  great  varieties  which  have  been  obtained  by  selection, 
Darwin  supposes  that  through  similar  means,  one  species  has 
thus  in  time  passed  into  another,  and  a more  advanced  kind 
has  been  derived,  until  at  last  the  perfect  form  of  man 
appeared ; but  he  candidly  owns  that  whilst  it  is  natural  to 
expect  we  should  meet  with  cases  of  this  transition,  neither 
experience  nor  geology  lend  any  support  to  his  theory ; we 
seem  to  have  an  actual  proof  of  its  failure  in  the  dodo,  didun - 
cuius,  solitaire , and  other  similar  members  of  the  same  family, 
which,  though  apparently  of  most  ancient  ancestry,  like  many 
remnants  of  old  families,  have  still  made  no  advance  on  their 
forefathers,  but  become  effete  and  died  out. 

If  the  development  theory  were  correct,  and  various  pairs 
of  human  beings  gradually  arose  from  some  primitive  simple 
forms  of  life,  it  would  be  extremely  improbable,  when  they 
attained  their  highest  and  most  perfect  states,  that  they 
would  still  bear  such  a close  resemblance  to  each  other  as 
the  different  sections  of  the  human  family  are  found  to  do. 
We  should  rather  expect  to  realize  the  tales  of  early  tra- 
vellers and  navigators,  and  find  some  like  the  Cyclops,  others 
hirsute,  some  with  tails,  others  with  some  other  equally 
outre  peculiarity,  and  certainly  none  so  nearly  approaching 
the  other,  as  only  to  vary  a little  in  the  facial  angle  or  in  a 
few  shades  of  color. 

Whatever  was  the  primary  type  which  terminated  in  man. 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


65 


as  much  variation  would  be  looked  for  between  the  two  as 
is  found  between  the  highest  and  lowest  animals  of  the  same 
family.  Or  even  if,  allowing  the  views  of  those  to  be  correct 
who  adopt  that  of  a simultaneous  creation,  with  many  distinct 
races  of  man,  we  should  expect  to  find  great  and  surprising 
differences  between  them. 

Therefore  these  philosophic  speculations,  ingenious  as  they 
undoubtedly  are,  do  not  afford  any  satisfactory  information 
as  to  the  origin  of  our  race ; and  it  is  quite  as  well  they 
do  not ; few  will  be  found  desirous  to  establish  their  relation- 
ship with  the  lower  forms  of  life.  But  even  by  Darwin’s 
own  theory  of  natural  selection  and  struggle  for  life,  we  have 
a sufficient  cause  assigned  for  all  the  varieties  of  the  human 
race  which  now  exist,  and  which  his  warmest  supporters 
cannot  deny. 

The  evidence  obtained  from  geology  on  this  point  of  in- 
quiry is  satisfactory  as  far  as  it  goes.  The  oldest  human 
remains  which  have  been  discovered,  clearly  attest  the  fact 
that  man  was  the  same  then  that  he  is  now ; his  frame  has 
undergone  no  change;  from  his  first  appearance  on  the 
earth’s  surface  to  the  present  day,  he  has  continued  precisely 
the  same.  Two  grand  truths  are  obtained  from  geology  : — 
First,  that  the  epoch  of  man’s  creation  is  comparatively  re- 
cent, in  fact  that  there  has  not  been  any  later  form  of  animal 
life  discovered ; that  he  was  the  last  and  terminating*  link  in 
the  creation.  Next,  that  he  was  made  a perfect  man,  not 
an  approximation  to  one,  and  as  easily  to  be  identified  as 
any  of  the  preserved  remains  of  our  race,  which  are  still 
found  in  the  catacombs  of  Egypt,  are  with  man  in  the  present 
day. 

But  what  geology  affirms,  Giod’s  holy  word  declares,  and 
in  plain  and  simple  terms  gives  an  account  of  our  creation, 
which  is  both  consonant  with  reason  and  geology. 

The  Bible  is  by  far  the  most  ancient  record  existing, 
whatever  may  be  affirmed  to  the  contrary  by  the  advocates 
of  Egyptian,  Hindu,  or  Chinese  literature.  No  proof  has 
yet  been  given  that  any  of  their  writings  can  claim  an  anti- 
quity at  all  approaching  that  of  Scripture,  and  in  their 


66 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


puerile  myths  few  vestiges  of  truth  are  to  be  traced,  and 
those  evidently  drawn  from  the  Bible,  but  nothing  to 
invalidate  the  scriptural  account  of  man's  creation.  That 
after  all  the  grand  convulsions  which  shattered  our  globe, 
and  destroyed  its  earliest  inhabitants  had  ceased,  the 
Creator's  fiat  again  renewed  the  surface  of  the  earth  with 
fresh  forms  of  vegetation,  and  peopled  it  with  new  races  of 
inhabitants,  over  which  man,  made  in  the  Divine  image,  was 
called  forth  to  preside.  Thus  he  was  the  last  formed  being, 
infinitely  superior  to  the  rest  of  the  creation,  endowed 
with  the  distinguishing  gifts  of  speech  and  reason,  the 
Creator  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  he 
became  a living  soul ; in  token  of  his  higher  rank,  he  was 
appointed  God's  vicegerent  on  earth,  the  Lord  of  the  Crea- 
tion, which  power  he  still  continues  to  wield. 

We  learn,  therefore,  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  pro- 
gressive advancement,  that  man  was  made  perfect ; indeed, 
every  species  of  animal  is  declared  to  have  been  so  likewise 
from  its  creation,  each  after  its  kind,  and  therefore  one  could 
not  have  passed  into  another ; and  experience  proves  That 
none  have  done  so,  for  each  order  of  creatures  continues  the 
same  it  ever  was,  and  still  retains  all  its  peculiar  and  distinc- 
tive features. 

But  this  scriptural  account  does  not  at  all  invalidate  the 
fact,  that  there  is  a certain  amount  of  resemblance  between 
the  human  frame  and  that  of  many  creatures  far  lower  in  the 
scale  of  the  creation ; as,  for  instance,  Owen  states  that  in 
the  head  of  a codfish,  ninety-five  per  cent,  of  its  bones  agree 
with  those  of  the  human  skull,  are  found  in  the  same  places, 
and  are  called  by  the  same  names.  It  only  amounts  to  this, 
that  out  of  all  the  previous  creations  a superior  being  has 
been  made  whose  admirably  formed  frame  embraces  some 
part  of  each,  which  in  combination  tends  to  render  it  the 
perfection  of  all  preceding  it,  and  a suitable  receptacle  for 
an  immortal  spirit. 

From  this  statement  of  the  commencement  of  our  race, 
we  next  proceed  to  consider  its  varieties  which  now  people 
the  world. 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


67 


There  are  many  in  the  present  day  who  deny  that  our 
race  originated  with  a single  pair.  The  great  diversity  of 
color  and  form  found  to  exist  in  various  parts  of  the  globe, 
lead  some  to  suppose  there  were  at  least  three  original  pairs, 
others  again  affirm  those  to  be  insufficient. 

At  one  of  the  meetings  of  the  Ethnological  Society,  a 
paper  on  this  subject  was  read  by  Mr.  Crawfurd,  in  which 
the  assertion  was  made,  “ that  there  are  distinct  varieties 
in  the  human  species,  as  in  those  of  other  animals,  and 
that  it  is  impossible  by  change  of  climate,  or  food,  or  cir- 
cumstances, to  produce  those  marked  differences  which 
are  perceptible  amongst  mankind ; that  he  considered  there 
are  sixty  varieties  of  the  human  race/'  and  so  must  have  as 
many  original  pairs  to  begin  with.  One  thing  at  least  is  very 
evident  in  this  opinion,  that  he  is  no  convert  to  Darwin’s 
theory  of  natural  selection,  and  the  passing  of  one  species 
into  another,  as  he  evidently  implies  his  belief  in  the  human 
race  having  been  transmitted  from  its  first  parents  to  the 
present  day  unaltered. 

It  is  not  contrary,  however,  to  scripture,  that  the  present 
race  of  man  began  with  four  original  pairs.  When  the  an- 
tediluvian world  perished,  the  inmates  of  the  ark  became 
the  parents  of  the  existing  families. 

But  this  will  not  satisfy  the  President  of  the  Ethnological 
Society.  He  affirms,  “ it  is  impossible  for  a negro  to  become 
white,  or  a white  man  to  become  black,  by  change  of  food  or 
climate  ; and  the  few  instances  of  albinos  that  are  known  can 
only  be  regarded  as  monstrosities.”  Supposing,  however, 
such  a statement  to  be  true,  what  does  it  amount  to  beyond 
declaring  that  one  of  the  primeval  pairs  must  have  been 
white  and  another  black,  and  that  these  extremes  of  color 
cannot  change,  which  is  by  no  means  agreeable  with  ex- 
perience, as  he  himself  strangely  acknowledges  in  apparent 
contradiction  of  his  own  assertion,  by  mentioning  some 
curious  cases  of  monstrosities,  such  as  of  a man  who  had 
quills  like  a porcupine,  and  another  who  was  completely 
covered  with  hair,  whose  children  also  possessed  the  same 
strange  peculiarity, 

F 2 


68 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


Climate,  it  is  well  known,  has  a decided  influence  in 
altering  the  form  and  features*  of  man.  As  a general  rule 
the  color  of  the  inhabitants  of  a country  will  have  a close 
connection  with  its  latitude.  The  colder  climates  being 
inhabited  by  fairer  races  than  the  warmer  ones,  and  the 
hottest  being  the  abode  of  the  black. 

The  epidermic  cells  containing  the  dark-colored  pigment 
which  produces  the  black  skin,  is  found  in  the  European  as 
well  as  the  negro,  and  the  difference  between  the  two  seems 
to  be  chiefly  owing  to  climate ; the  hot  summer  sun  of 
Europe  produces  its  effects  in  patches,  which  are  larger  and 
darker  in  proportion  to  the  latitude.  In  southern  France, 
the  females  who  are  employed  in  field  labor,  may  be  com- 
monly seen  with  their  faces  almost  covered  with  dark  freckles 
or  rather  patches,  for  some  are  of  considerable  size ; but  in 
tropical  latitudes,  where  the  heat  is  constantly  great,  the 
skin  is  of  one  uniform  dark  color. 

Jaundice  and  other  diseases  are  known  to  change  the 
color  of  the  European-’s  skin;  still  it  cannot  be  allowed, 
whatever  influence  disease  may  have  on  it,  that  the  color  of 
the  negroes  skin  is  unhealthy  or  unnatural,  it  must  be  re- 
garded as  the  natural  one  where  the  sun  obtains  its  greatest 
power,  as  the  contrary  is  where  it  has  lost  it.* 

“ Franklin  placed  different  colored  pieces  of  cloth  in  the 
sunshine  on  the  snow,  they  were  so  arranged  that  the  rays 
should  fall  on  them  equally ; after  a certain  time  he  examined 
them,  and  found  that  the  black  cloth  had  melted  its  way 
deeply  into  the  snow,  the  yellow  to  a less  extent,  and  the 
white  not  at  all ; the  conclusion  he  drew  was,  that  surfaces 
become  warm  in  exact  proportion  to  the  depth  of  their  tint, 
because  the  darker  surface  absorbs  the  greater  amount  of 
rays/”  Hence  we  see  that  whilst  light-colored  races  are 
less  susceptible  of  the  effects  of  the  sunJs  rays,  the  dark, 

* Human  life  is  affected  by  heat.  The  coloring  fluid  which  darkens  the 
skin  may  be  occasioned  by  the  torpid  action  of  the  liver  in  hot  climates.  It  is 
well  known  that  Hindus  sent  to  the  mountains  for  any  length  of  time  grow 
lighter  in  color,  whilst  men  living  near  the  sea  are  noticed  to  be  both  darker 
and  shorter  than  those  inland. — Cracroft  Wilson,  Esq, 


OUE  EACE  AND  ITS  OEIGIN. 


69 


on  the  contrary,  are  more  so,  and  that  each  has  naturally 
acquired  its  own  color,  either  white  or  black,  according  to 
the  climate  it  inhabits,  and  “ explain  it  as  we  may,  there  is 
no  fact  more  certain  than  that  a habit  once  firmly  fixed, 
once  organised  in  the  individual,  becomes  almost  as  sus- 
ceptible of  transmission  as  any  normal  tendency.” 

What  was  the  original  color  of  man  at  his  creation  ? 
We  have  no  proof  that  it  was  white  or  black,  these  must 
rather  be  regarded  as  the  extremes ; and  considering  that 
man  was  in  all  probability  created  in  a warm  climate,  where 
there  would  be  no  need  of  artificial  means  to  protect  his 
person,  his  color  would  be  more  likely  to  have  been  either 
red  or  brown ; but  in  later  ages,  when  the  family  of  man 
was  dispersed  and  compelled  to  depart  under  different 
leaders  from  their  common  abode,  they  would  be  men 
selected  for  superior  energy  and  bravery  of  character,  and 
distinguished  most  likely  by  strongly-marked  features,  those 
would  in  some  measure  be  impressed  upon  their  several 
tribes  or  clans,  as  was  the  case  with  Jacob  and  Esau,  who, 
though  twin  brothers,  greatly  differed  in  person  and  cha- 
racter, one  being  hairy,  the  other  smooth,  one  a man  of  war, 
the  other  of  peace,  which  qualities  were  perpetuated  in  their 
descendants. 

At  the  dispersion  of  the  human  family,  each  section  would 
go  in  that  direction  to  which  either  fancy  or  circumstances 
might  lead.  Thus  those  embryo  nations  would  have  their 
beginning  under  as  many  heads  as  even  the  most  fastidious 
of  our  ethnologists  could  desire,  and  whilst  some  of  those 
bands  would  most  probably  still  continue  to  inhabit  a similar 
climate  to  that  of  Chaldea,  and  so  preserve  their  own  pecu- 
liar features  and  color ; others,  gradually  working  their  way 
to  the  north  and  south,  to  the  colder  and  hotter  regions  of 
the  globe,  it  is  highly  probable  the  one  would  in  process  of 
time,  become  as  much  lighter  as  the  other  would  be  darker, 
according  to  the  increased  degree  of  heat  or  cold  to  which 
they  might  be  severally  subjected,  and  the  consequent  change 
of  habit  thus  acquired.  For  whilst  the  resident  of  the  torrid 
zone  would  cast  off  every  garment  as  an  incumbrance,  and 


70 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


so  expose  his  skin  to  the  tanning  influence  of  the  sun,  the 
other  would  be  compelled  by  the  increased  cold  of  the  cli- 
mate to  add  to  his  artificial  clothing,  and  carefully  envelop 
his  person  in  the  skins  and  furs  of  animals.  The  body 
therefore  would  thus,  from  two  causes,  decrease  of  climatic 
heat  and  additional  clothing,  gradually  acquire  an  increased 
lightness  of  color,  and  the  same  continuing  to  operate 
through  a lengthened  period,  this  distinction  would  become 
more  marked  and  fixed,  until  at  last  the  present  extremes 
would  be  attained. 

It  must  likewise  be  remembered,  with  the  climate  we  have, 
not  only  the  extremes  of  black  and  white,  but  of  every 
intermediate  shade  as  well — yellow,  red,  brown,  and  olive. 
Supposing,  therefore,  that  red  or  brown  were  the  original 
colors  of  our  race ; radiating  from  them,  we  should  have 
towards  the  south  copper,  chocolate,  and  finally  black ; in 
the  contrary  direction,  olive,  yellow,  and  lastly  white.  And 
with  these  we  should  have  the  following  agreement  of  cli- 
mate : — That  of  Chaldea  being  taken  as  the  primary  one, 
since  all  view  it  as  the  cradle  of  our  race,  would  be  warm ; 
further  south  hot ; and,  at  the  equator,  burning ; to  the 
north  of  Chaldea  temperate;  still  further  north,  cold  and 
glacial. 

Local  circumstances,  also,  in  some  instances,  materially 
affect  the  climate.  The  sandy  deserts  of  Africa,  where  there 
is  neither  water,  grass,  nor  trees  to  modify  the  heat  of  the 
sun^s  rays,  materially  add  to  its  scorching  effect  on  the 
human  skin. 

In  opposition  to  this  theory,  it  is  asserted  that  no  race  is 
found  which  has  greatly  changed  color  since  the  historic 
period  : but  it  may  be  answered,  what  is  really  learnt  from 
history;  is  it  anything  more  than  a record  of  wars  and  mur- 
ders ; of  the  setting  up  and  pulling  down  of  kingdoms  ; of 
their  greatness  and  grandeur  ? Anything  else  is  merely 
accidental ; literally  nothing  is  known  of  the  social  state  of 
ancient  races  from  their  histories  which  have  reached  us  ; it  is 
thus  taken  for  granted,  as  a matter  of  course,  that  the  black 
were  always  black,  and  the  white  always  white ; but  surely 
this  remains  to  be  proved. 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


71 


Of  all  ancient  nations,  most,  is  now  known  of  the  social 
state  of  the  Egyptians ; this  is  acquired  from  their  pictured 
walls,  fragments  of  manufactures,  varied  implements,  pre- 
served in  the  deep  recesses  of  their  catacombs ; an  insight  has 
thus  been  gained  into  the  manners  and  social  life  of  a race 
which  lived  nearly  four  thousand  years  ago.  Compared 
with  these,  even  the  remains  of  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum 
are  of  minor  interest,  as  they  are  of  far  inferior  antiquity. 
The  ruins  of  Nineveh,  indeed,  are  opening  up  a page  of 
history  of  almost  equal  interest. 

From  the  knowledge  thus  obtained  of  the  domestic  state 
and  probable  appearance  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  the  con- 
clusion is  that  they  were  not  black,  but  rather  red  or  copper 
colored.  To  the  ancients  very  few  colors  were  known, 
or,  more  properly  speaking,  were  distinguished  by  names. 
It  was  with  them,  most  likely,  as  it  was  with  the  Maori : 
every  dark  color  was  spoken  of  as  being  pango,  black ; the 
blue  sky  was  so  called  ; any  light  color,  as  yellow,  was 
ma,  white;  thus  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  though  yellow 
would  be  considered  white  or  fair ; and  the  daughter  of 
Pharoah  called  herself  black,  though  evidently,  from  the 
description  given  of  her  in  the  Song  of  Solomon,  she  could 
not  have  been  so.  “ I am  black  and  yet  comely.”  She 
bids  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  not  to  look  upon  her  with 
disdain,  for  the  sun  in  all  his  glory  had  looked  upon  her, 
and  placed  his  impress  on  her  cheeks ; and  although  in 
their  estimation  she  might  appear  black,  yet  to  Solomon  she 
was  “ the  fairest  among  women,”  and  he  had  selected  her  as 
his  wife.  The  king  speaks  of  her  lips  as  being  like  “ a 
thread  of  scarlet  ” — so  delicate  and  thin,  and  compares  her 
temples  to  “ a piece  of  pomegranite ; ” thus  her  lips  could 
not  have  been  thick  like  the  negro's,  or  her  cheeks  black, 
for  they  are  likened  to  the  rich  color  of  that  fruit  : 
hence  it  may  be  gathered  that  the  ancient  Egyptian  more 
nearly  resembled  that  of  the  red  race  of  North  America, 
and  this  opinion  is  corroborated  by  paintings,  still  to  be 
seen  in  their  temples,  tombs,  and  catacombs.  Since  that  time, 
however,  how  much  darker  have  their  descendants  become. 


72 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


That  climate  does  affect  color,  is  not  a mere  surmise,  it  is 
a fact  of  which  there  is  the  clearest  proof. 

Of  all  races  not  one  has  preserved  its  distinctive  nation- 
ality more  perfectly  than  the  Jew;  his  strongly  marked 
features  of  the  present  day  agree  with  those  portrayed  by 
the  Egyptian  artist  of  old,  and  is  seen  in  the  sculptures  of 
Nineveh.  Dispersed  and  scattered  amongst  all  nations  of 
the  world  during  many  ages,  the  Jew  is  at  once  distinguished 
from  every  other.  But  has  he  been  equally  uninfluenced  by 
the  varied  climates  he  has  sojourned  in  ? — has  he  not  become 
in  a great  measure  assimilated  to  the  color  of  those  he  has 
lived  amongst  ? 

The  English  and  German  Jews  are  many  shades  lighter 
than  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese,  and  they  in  their  turn  are 
much  lighter  than  those  of  Morocco,  and  yet  they  have  all 
preserved  the  characteristic  features  of  their  race. 

But  there*  is  still  an  ancient  colony  of  J ews  in  India, 
supposed  to  belong  to  one  of  the  ten  tribes  which  were 
carried  into  captivity  by  Shalmanezer,  and  have  thus  been 
banished  from  Israel  between  two  and  three  thousand  years. 
These  Jews  have  become  assimilated  to  the  inhabitants  of 
the  torrid  zone  in  color.  The  Malabar  Jews  are  black. 

The  tanning  power  of  the  sun  is  well  known,  and  how 
soon  it  tells  upon  the  skin  in  the  beginning  of  summer.  It 
is  the  sun  that  gives  the  nut-brown  shade  which  all  admire 
and  regard  as  the  rich  glow  of  health.  If  the  sun  has  this 
power  in  temperate  climes,  is  it  surprising  that  the  European 
when  exposed  to  the  heat  of  a tropical  clime,  should  become 
several  degrees  darker  than  he  was  in  his  native  land  ? And  if 
this  be  case  with  him,  is  there  any  improbability  in  a servile 
race,  such  as  that  of  Ham  was  prophetically  doomed  to  be, 
becoming  black,  when  their  hard  lot  compelled  them  con- 
stantly to  endure  the  heat  and  burthen  of  the  day  ? The 
delicate  European  in  India  who  carefully  defends  himself 
from  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  only  dares  to  stir  out  after 
sunset  or  before  sunrise,  never  willingly  letting  it  shine  upon 
him,  may  to  a certain  extent  be  viewed  as  an  exception,  but 
he  cannot  be  regarded  even  with  his  yellow  skin  as  a natu- 


OUE  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


73 


ralized  inhabitant  of  that  region  of  the  sun,  or  his  sickly 
offspring,  who  from  being  thus  reared  in  the  shade,  look  like 
blanched  plants,  which  soon  run  up,  fade,  and  die  away, 
unless  speedily  transferred  to  a colder  clime.  This  however 
would  not  be  the  case  if  they  were  to  be  more  exposed  to 
the  heat ; many  indeed  might  never  live  to  be  acclimatised, 
but  those  who  did,  would  gradually  acquire  the  hue  of  the 
climate  they  lived  in.  This  would  especially  be  the  case 
with  their  children,  if  their  bodies  were  exposed  to  the  sun 
in  infancy,  as  those  of  negro  children  are,  then  the  marks  of 
his  rays  would  be  indelibly  stamped  upon  their  tender  skin. 
This  was  exemplified  in  the  family  of  an  officer  long  resident 
in  India,  who  permitted  his  children  to  run  about  with  their 
ayah  without  restraint,  though  both  parents  were  from  Scot- 
land ; their  offspring  thus  became  quite  dark,  but  as  strong 
and  healthy  as  native  children. 

In  1834,  the  “ Charles  Eaton ” was  wrecked  on  Murray’s 
Island  in  Torres  Straits,  and  all  the  crew  were  murdered  by 
the  natives,  with  the  exception  of  a boy  named  John  Ireland, 
and  the  infant  son  of  Captain  Doyley,  who  were  after- 
wards rescued.  A brief  narrative  was  published  by  the 
former,  in  which  he  states  that  they  were  both  stripped  of 
their  clothing,  and  the  effect  of  the  sun  on  the  child’s  skin 
soon  became  very  apparent.  In  a few  months  he  was  not 
to  be  distinguished  from  the  other  children,  his  hair 
from  its  lighter  hue  being  the  only  thing  by  which  he 
could  be  known  at  a distance.  He  also  stated  that  a 
dark  chocolate  is  the  color  of  the  inhabitants  of  those 
isles.  Can  it  be  doubted,  had  the  poor  child  been  doomed 
to  pass  his  life  amongst  those  natives,  that  he  would  have 
become  nearly  as  dark  as  themselves.  When  once  the  sun 
has  colored  the  mucous  network  of  the  skin,  every  subsequent 
shade  it  gives,  assists  in  perpetuating  a still  darker  hue ; 
the  deeper  the  dye,  the  more  it  absorbs  the  heat,  and  thus 
renders  the  color  almost  indelibly  stamped.  The  skin  then 
must  necessarily  require  a far  longer  period  to  lose,  than  it 
first  did  to  acquire  the  shade.  Still,  even  the  negro  in  pro- 
cess of  time  may  acquire  a lighter  hue. 


74 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


Du  Chaillu,  speaking  of  the  Hill  natives,  states,  “ in  color 
they  are  rather  a yellowish  black.  Indeed,  I have  remarked, 
that  in  all  parts  of  the  Continent,  from  the  bounds  of  the 
Sahara  to  the  Apingi,  the  natives  of  mountainous  regions  in 
the  interior  are  much  lighter  than  the  people  of  the  sea 
board,  the  plains,  or  desert.” 

A great  difference  is  also  observed  in  the  color  of  high 
chiefs  and  men  of  inferior  caste ; those  who  have  constantly 
kept  their  persons  covered  and  not  engaged  in  field  labour, 
being  much  fairer  than  the  others.  In  the  Hew  Zealand 
race  there  is  an  admixture  of  the  negro,  as  the  woolly  or 
frizzly  hair  and  facial  angle  clearly  indicate,  still,  though 
several  shades  darker  than  others,  they  have  evidently  lost 
much  of  their  original  color.  The  Maori,  both  from 
language  and  tradition,  evidently  came  from  the  Sandwich 
Islands,  but  he  is  now  many  shades  lighter  than  their  pre- 
sent inhabitants. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  gipsies,  so  generally  scattered 
over  Europe.  They  were  once  without  doubt  nearly  black, 
as  it  is  now  pretty  well  ascertained  that  they  are  of  East 
Indian  origin,  and  therefore  must  have  become  fairer  by 
their  long  sojourn  in  colder  climates.  Bishop  Heber,  sail- 
ing up  the  Ganges,  states  that  he  reached  one  of  their 
encampments,  and  some  of  them  came  out  of  their  booths 
as  he  passed — “ a race  that  no  man  can  mistake,  meet  them 
where  he  may ; though  they  are,  as  might  be  expected  from 
their  latitude  and  exposure  to  the  climate,  far  blacker  here 
than  in  England,  or  even  than  the  usual  race  of  Bengalese.” 
It  appears  highly  probable  that  the  gipsies  were  originally 
one  of  the  Aboriginal  races  of  India,  which  are  much  darker 
than  the  Hindu,  and  perfectly  separated  from  them.*  The 
same  may  be  said  of  the  Esquimaux,  who  most  likely  were 
once  far  darker  than  they  are  now.  C{  Common  experience 
proves  that  men  who  are  kept  in  darkness  for  a large 
portion  of  their  lives  lose  color,  and  exhibit  an  un- 
healthy pallor.  Contrast  the  miner  with  the  mountaineer ; 
the  former  seems  to  be  blanched,  as  a plant  raised  in  dark 

* Library  of  Useful  Knowledge , vol.  ii. , p.  149. 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


75 


ness  ; the  latter  glows  with  healthy  as  though  he  had  absorbed 
the  sunbeams.” 

The  characteristic  marks  and  distinctions  of  the  various 
sections  of  the  human  race  are,  perhaps,  owing  in  no  small 
degree  to  their  peculiar  circumstances  and  customs.  In 
founding  a new  state  or  dynasty,  it  is  probable  some  leader 
would  be  selected  on  account  of  physical  superiority,  dis- 
tinction of  form,  strength  of  body  or  mind ; and  whatever 
might  be  his  characteristic  features  they  would  be  per- 
petuated in  some  degree  amongst  his  descendants.  This 
was  the  case  with  the  children  of  Abraham ; a feeling  of 
superiority  hindered  them  from  mixing  with  their  neigh- 
bours, and  kept  them  a distinct  people.  So  with  others 
who  in  a similar  way  from  their  success  and  prestige  have 
fancied  it  too  great  an  honour  for  any  to  be  allied  with 
them;  and  thus  in  process  of  time  a distinctive  feature 
would  be  acquired. 

Tribes  commenced  under  difficulties,  hardships,  bad  fare, 
constant  wars,  &c.,  are  sure  to  have  some  distinguishing 
marks  stamped  upon  them.  Infant  tribes  are  often  despised 
by  more  advanced  ones,  no  intermarriages  take  place  be- 
tween them,  therefore,  confined  to  themselves,  a family 
likeness  is  thus  acquired.  This  is  the  case  with  the  Maori. 
The  commencement  of  a tribe  is  frequently  occasioned  by 
the  hostility  of  those  they  secede  from — it  is  in  fact  a 
kind  of  banishment.  They  wander  to  a fresh  locality,  in 
general  inferior  to  the  one  abandoned,  and  thus  are  separated 
from  those  they  have  left,  and  for  a long  time  from  their 
newly-acquired  neighbours,  until  they  gradually  become 
acquainted,  and  cease  to  view  each  other  with  suspicion. 

Dr.  Devay,  professor  of  medicine  at  Lyons,  states  that 
polydactilism,  or  a multiplicity  of  fingers,  amongst  other 
things,  is  found  where  intermarriages  of  relatives  are  com- 
mon. He  relates  that  in  a secluded  spot  where  the  inhabi- 
tants had  no  communication  with  other  populations,  children 
being  born  with  six  fingers  had  become  quite  common  ; and 
that  this  strange  anomaly  disappeared  some  time  after  a new 
road  had  been  cut  through  the  place.  The  same  is  common 


76 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


in  other  secluded  localities,  so  also  the  being  web-fingered 
and  toed. 

In  northern  regions,  where  tribes  wander  exposed  to  in- 
tense cold,  having  few  means  of  resisting  it,  dwelling  in 
badly  constructed  huts,  in  constant  smoke  and  filth,  often  in 
subterranean  abodes,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that  in  process  of 
time  the  effects  must  be  stamped  on  their  features ; the 
oblique  eye  of  the  Tartar  is  at  once  suggestive  of  smoky 
hovels  and  dark  abodes.  As  long  as  their  isolation  exists, 
however  numerous  the  race,  such  distinctive  marks  will 
remain. 

The  negro  has  hair,  properly  so  termed,  and  not  wool. 
One  difference  between  the  hair  of  a negro  and  that  of 
the  European  consists  in  the  more  curled  and  frizzled  con- 
dition of  the  former.  This,  however,  is  only  a difference 
in  the  degree  of  crispation,  some  European  hair  being  very 
similar.  Another  difference  is  in  the  greater  quantity  of 
coloring  matter  or  pigment  in  the  hair  of  the  negro.  It 
may  be  worth  while  to  remark  that  if  this  cuticular  excres- 
cence of  the  negro  were  really  not  hair  but  a fine  wool,  if  it 
were  precisely  analogous  to  the  finest  wool,  still  this  would 
by  no  means  prove  the  negro  to  be  of  a peculiar  and  separate 
stock,  since  we  know  that  some  tribes  of  animals  bear  wool, 
while  others  of  the  same  species  are  covered  with  hair.  It 
is  true  that  in  some  instances  this  peculiarity  depends  en- 
tirely on  climate,  and  is  subject  to  vary  when  the  climate  is 
changed ; but,  in  others,  it  is  deeply  fixed  in  the  breed,  and 
almost  amounts  to  a permanent  variety.*  This  is  the  case 
with  the  sheep  in  the  Tropics ; their  wool  is  there  converted 
into  coarse  hair,  and  the  character  of  the  animal  seems  like- 
wise in  some  measure  to  be  changed. 

In  the  Negro  race  the  practice  of  exposing  the  person  to 
the  fierce  rays  of  the  sun,  and  their  copious  unction  of  oil, 
must  tend  to  render  not  only  the  body  black,  but  the  hair 
of  the  head  crisp  and  woolly.  The  universal  European 
practice  of  clothing  the  person  and  covering  the  head, 
accounts  for  the  fairness  of  skin  and  straightness  of  hair. 

* Prichard’s  Natural  History  of  Man,  p.  104. 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


77 


Some  tribes  view  certain  peculiarities  of  person  as  being 
most  becoming.  In  America  there  is  a tribe  which  has  the 
practice  of  pressing  the  skull  of  the  poor  infant  between  two 
boards  to  render  it  flat,  hence  they  have  acquired  the  sobriquet 
of  Flat  Heads.  The  Maori  admires  a flat  nose  as  a mark  of 
beauty,  and  to  acquire  this,  the  poor  infant  must  have  the 
bridge  of  the  nose  pressed  in  and  broken.  Thus  with  the 
Chinese  a small  foot  is  the  grand  proof  of  female  beauty ; 

% and  to  obtain  it  the  infant's  shoe  is  made  the  measure  of  the 
full-grown  woman's  foot.  Unnaturally  small  waists  are,  or 
used  to  be,  in  a similar  way  admired  with  us. 

Thus  different  nations  have  some  custom  or  other  which 
tends  to  impart  a peculiar  feature  to  that  section  of  the 
human  family,  and  so  aids  in  puzzling  ethnologists  to  ac- 
count for  these  apparently  unaccountable  differences,  and 
compels  them  to  demand  an  increased  number  of  parents 
for  the  human  race. 

The  variety  of  color  in  the  human  hair  must  likewise  be 
noticed;  it  is  almost  as  wonderful  as  even  the  different 
shades  of  the  skin.  To  a certain  extent  the  complexion 
corresponds  with  the  hair.  The  bright  red  is  generally 
accompanied  by  a freckled  skin,  the  flaxen  by  the  contrast  of 
the  lily  and  the  rose  on  the  face,  the  black  by  the  absence  of 
the  latter.  Races  may  be  distinguished  by  their  hair.  The 
prevailing  colour  of  the  Dane  is  red,  of  the  Saxon  flaxen, 
and  of  the  Spaniard  black.  The  eye  of  one  is  grey,  of 
another  blue,  and  of  the  last  black.  The  hair  of  the  Dane 
is  curly,  of  the  Saxon  wavy,  and  of  the  Spaniard  straight ; 
and  widely  separated  as  the  red  haired  inhabitant  of  northern 
Europe  is  from  the  Polynesian  Isles,  yet  even  there  we  find 
his  counterpart  in  the  natives  of  Fiji,  Samoa  and  other  isles. 
The  general  color  of  the  New  Zealander's  hair  is  black,  but 
instances  of  brown,  flaxen,  and  red  are  far  from  being  uncom- 
mon. Climate  seems  to  have  a decided  influence  in  determining 
the  color  of  the  hair.  The  colonial  children  of  Australia 
are  generally  to  be  distinguished  by  their  white  curly  locks ; 
the  horses  of  Normandy,  by  being  so  frequently  white,  whilst 
those  of  Australia  are  chestnut. 


78 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


The  color  of  the  eye  is  also  a test  of  its  strength.  The 
brown  and  dark  colored  are  weaker,  and  more  susceptible 
of  injury  from  various  causes  than  the  grey  or  blue  eyes. 
The  light  blue  are  generally  the  most  powerful,  and  next  to 
those  are  the  grey.  The  lighter  the  pupil  the  longer  and 
greater  is  the  degree  of  tension  which  the  eye  can  sustain. 

The  color  of  the  European  is  white,  but  there  is  almost 
as  much  difference  between  the  fair-skinned  Saxon  and  the 
swarthy  Spaniard,  as  between  the  Arab  and  the  Negro. 
The  Maori,  too,  can  show  as  fair  a skin  as  the  Spaniard 
or  Portuguese ; and  proverbially  proud  as  the  American 
Spaniard  is  of  his  pure  descent,  it  is  rather  to  be  proved 
by  his  ancestral  pedigree  than  his  fair  complexion. 

It  may  likewise  be  remarked  that  the  feelings  of  the 
various  sections  of  the  human  family  towards  each  other 
are  greatly  influenced  by  color.  Each  race  views  any  devi- 
ation from  his  own  as  a sign  of  inferiority,  and  a departure 
from  the  law  of  nature. 

Different  races  pride  themselves  on  their  pure  descent, 
and  severally  view  others  as  their  inferiors ; in  ancient  times 
the  polished  Greek  regarded  the  Persian  as  a barbarian, 
and  the  Jew,  too,  entertained  the  same  idea  of  the  Gentile 
world.  Paul,  wrecked  on  the  isle  of  Malta,  styled  its  in- 
habitants barbarians.  Whilst  the  white  has  a feeling  of 
abhorrence  when  he  first  sees  the  black,  he,  in  his  turn, 
experiences  a similar  sensation  towards  the  other.  Nor 
can  this  be  more  strongly  exemplified  than  by  the  fact 
that  each  makes  the  opposite  color  to  his  own  to  be  that 
of  the  evil  one.  With  the  white,  Satan  is  thought  to  be 
black,  but  with  the  black  he  is  supposed  to  be  white.  The 
Maori  and  Chinese  paint  him  red,  and  the  latter  have  dis- 
tinguished our  countrymen  by  the  name  of  red  devils.  A 
similar  feeling  is  detected  in  their  respective  ideas  of  mourn- 
ing, the  sign  of  grief  and  sorrow  with  one  being  black,  with 
another  white. 

It  seems  natural  that  each  should  transfer  to  the  opposite 
that  which  he  dislikes.  The  red  Indian  speaks  with  con- 
tempt of  the  pale  skins.  The  white  expresses  a like  feeling 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


79 


towards  the  niggers  and  blackamoors.  And  even  the 
Maori  does  not  conceal  his  contempt  for  the  papatea  wai 
tai  ” — the  untattooed  colorless-faced  sons  of  the  ocean. 
Nothing  is  more  repulsive  to  the  feelings  of  the  white  than 
the  naked  figure  of  his  own  race.  He  turns  from  it  with 
disgust ; and  yet  the  most  delicate  and  refined  do  not  expe- 
rience similar  feelings  in  viewing  the  naked  forms  of  the 
brown ; the  color  of  the  skin  being  more  subdued  and  less 
striking  to  the  eye,  seems  natural.  The  shark  often  allows 
the  black  and  brown  swimmer  to  escape,  but  darts  at  once 
upon  the  white. 

Have  we  any  proof  of  man  being  originally  that  low  and 
degraded  being  which  the  progressionists  would  make  him  ? 
He  early  proved  that  he  possessed  the  power  of  invention, 
and  even  manifested  a taste  for  the  fine  arts ; his  life  was  not 
consumed  merely  in  procuring  food  for  his  daily  sustenance, 
even  in  that  early  period  of  his  existence  the  harp  and 
the  organ  solaced  his  spare  hours,  the  exercise  of  the  highest 
powers  of  the  soul  even  then  was  seen  when  men  assembled 
together  for  Divine  worship. 

W e have  in  the  Mosaic  history  of  the  patriarchs  an  ac- 
count of  the  early  progress  of  the  arts.  Cain  built  a city, 
and  named  it  Enoch  after  his  son  ; Jabal  was  the  father  of 
those  who  dwelt  in  tents  ; Jubal,  his  brother,  was  the  father 
of  all  such  as  handle  the  harp  and  organ  ; Tubal  Cain  was 
the  instructor  of  every  artificer  in  brass  and  iron ; and,  in 
Seth's  time,  the  public  worship  of  God  was  established.  It 
is  therefore  evident,  that  even  from  the  commencement,  he 
was  capable  of  using  the  distinguishing  gift  of  reason  which 
was  bestowed  upon  him,  and  of  applying  it  to  the  same  uses 
which  he  does  now.  It  is  true  that  he  is  a progressive 
being,  capable  of  the  highest  state  of  advancement ; that  he 
has  always  held  the  highest  position,  and  was  never  in  his 
commencement  the  savage  possessing  only  the' stone  celt  and 
arrow-head  to  gain  him  a scanty  subsistence.  Still  it  is  also 
true  that  he  is  liable  to  retrograde.  He  did  so  when  he  first 
fell ; he  has  done  so  since  in  numberless  instances. 

The  Maori  is  an  example  ; he  has  retrograded  : every  step 


80 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


in  his  migratory  wanderings,  as  it  cut  him  off  more  and 
more  from  the  rest  of  the  human  family,  diminished  the 
stock  of  civilized  habits  he  had  to  draw  upon,  and  made  him 
so  much  the  more  destitute — as  the  man,  whose  pecuniary 
resources  through  mismanagement  or  misfortune  gradually 
fail,  is  compelled  to  resign  those  luxuries  and  comforts  which 
he  formerly  enjoyed  ; so,  many  sections  of  the  human  family 
have  thus  fallen  from  civilization  to  barbarism^ 

Relics  of  a former  civilisation  are  to  be  traced  in  the  finely- 
wrought  mats  and  elaborate  embroidery,  in  the  elegant  lattice 
work  of  their  houses,  their  canoes,  and  power  of  working  the 
greenstone.  The  heitiki  worn  round  their  necks  is  remark- 
able for  its  Indian  form,  which  closely  accords  with  the 
figures  sculptured  in  the  rock  temples  of  Salsette  and  Ele- 
phanta.  Many  of  their  words  are  Sanscrit,  and  much  of  the 
character  of  the  language.  So,  likewise,  are  some  of  their 
customs  to  be  traced  to  India.  The  complicated  tapu, 
evidently  instituted  to  enable  the  higher  to  control  the 
lower  classes,  marks  deep  design  and  wisdom  beyond  that 
of  the  present  day. 

Even  the  debased  inhabitants  of  Australia  and  Tasmania 
retain  some  few  marks  of  ancient  knowledge  and  civilisation. 
They  possess  the  boomerang,  now  viewed  as  a scientific 
missile  which  could  only  have  been  invented  by  an  enlight- 
ened people ; and  the  idea  is  supported  by  its  being  found 
on  the  pictured  walls  of  Egypt,  and  even  preserved  in  its 
tombs.  The  mystic  rite  of  corrobory  also  betokens  that 
their  ancestors  once  had  a more  complicated  system  of 
religion,  somewhat  corresponding  with  that  of  ancient 
Egypt. 

There  is  not  only  a great  diversity  of  colour  amongst  the 
different  sections  of  the  human  family,  but  likewise  of  feature 
and  size.  The  diminutive  form  of  theSamoede  and  Esqui- 
maux, tenants  of  the  frigid  zone,  and  of  the  Azteck,  the 
inhabitant  of  tropical  America,  compared  with  the  larger 
specimens  of  the  Celtic,  Saxon,  and  Patagonian  races,  must 
be  attributed  not  only  to  the  effects  of  climate,  but  also  to 
other  causes,  for  if  much  be  owing  to  extremes  of  cold. 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


81 


scarcity  of  food,  and  discomforts  of  life,  which  may  be 
regarded  as  hindrances  to  the  proper  development  of  the 
human  form ; still,  when  similar  defects  are  found  in  races 
living  in  more  genial  climes,  and  not  subjected  to  the  same 
evils,  it  is  evident  other  causes  must  be  sought  for  to  account 
for  such  peculiarities.  As  a general  rule,  the  mountaineer 
excels  in  size  the  inhabitant  of  the  plain;  but  this  seems 
only  to  apply  to  man : if  the  highlander  be  tall,  the  horses 
and  cattle  of  the  neighbouring  isles  are  dwarfs  : the  Shetland 
pony  and  black  cattle  are  perhaps  the  smallest  of  their  race ; 
it  is,  however,  remarkable,  and  a proof  that  every  rule  has 
its  exception,  whilst  they  are  the  inhabitants  of  cold  and 
stormy  isles,  the  little  Timor  pony  belongs  to  a luxuriant 
and  tropical  one. 

Whatever  may  be  the  difference  of  colour,  form,  or  feature 
of  the  various  families  of  men,  there  are  two  grand  proofs  of 
their  having  all  radiated  from  one  common  centre ; and  the 
first  of  these  is  the  general  consent  of  antiquity.  The  scrip- 
tural account  of  the  dispersion  from  Chaldea  is  confirmed  by 
local  histories.  The  gradual  moving  of  the  descendants  of 
Ham  westward  from  Babel  and  Nineveh,  where  they  appear 
first  to  have  located  themselves,  then  to  have  early  mi- 
grated south  to  Canaan,  Arabia,  Egypt,  India,  and  thence 
spread  out  over  that  vast  continent.  The  name  of  their 
founder,  Ham,  which  signifies  head,  seems  to  have  been 
preserved  in  that  of  their  god,  Am  or  Ammon.  If  an  idea 
of  the  complexion  of  the  Egyptians  may  be  formed  from  the 
numerous  paintings  found  in  their  temples  and  splendidly 
decorated  tombs,  in  which  the  colours  are  quite  fresh,  we 
must  conclude  that  they  were  of  a red  copper  or  light  cho- 
colate colour,  and  that  they  resembled  the  reddest  of  the 
Fellah  and  Kafir  tribes  now  existing  in  Africa.* 

Japhet  migrated  northward  and  westward,  occupying 
Europe,  and  perhaps  a portion  of  America.  His  name  being 
preserved  by  the  Greeks  in  that  of  Japetus. 

Shem  dwelt  in  many  of  the  parts  vacated  by  Ham  in  Arabia, 
Syria,  and  Chaldea,  but  placed  his  chief  abodes  on  the  banks 
* Prichard’s  “ Natural  History  of  Man,”  p.  135. 

G 


82 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


of  the  Euphrates,  Tigris,  Indus,  and  Ganges ; hence  perhaps 
the  allusion  to  these  rivers  chiefly  in  the  Mosaic  account  of 
the  creation.  The  Chinese  appear  to  claim  Noah  as  their 
great  progenitor,  and  his  name  seems  to  he  recognized  in 
that  of  their  reputed  founder,  Eo  or  Eoah.  Traces  of  Noah 
are  to  he  found  in  the  Polynesian  isles  as  well  as  in  Asia. 

After  these  grand  and  primitive  heads  of  nations,  come 
several  smaller  migrations.  The  ten  tribes  carried  to  Assyria, 
and  thence  dispersed  eastward  through  Asia,  southward 
through  India,  and  from  the  eastern  coast  of  that  continent 
probably  proceeding  to  America,  and  the  innumerable  Isles 
of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  where  they  are  met  by  other  migrations 
of  the  same  stock  from  India  : both  the  Malay  and  Polynesian 
may  be  viewed  as  radiating  from  the  same  source,  but  in 
different  lines. 

Nor  have  the  descendants  of  Ham  been  satisfied  with 
peopling  Africa.  They  are  to  be  traced  in  the  southern 
extremity  of  America,  in  Australia,  Tasmania,  New  Zealand, 
in  India,  China,  Japan,  Polynesia,  and  the  East  Indian  Isles. 
At  a later  period  European  races  stock  America,  and  are 
now  rapidly  peopling  all  those  parts  which  Shem  and  Ham 
first  colonized ; and  thus  at  this  moment,  the  descendants  of 
Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet  are  meeting  together  in  the  remote 
islands  of  the  sea. 

But  one  strong  evidence  in  support  of  the  original  unity 
of  our  race,  is  language.  The  identity  of  words,  and  tra- 
cing them  up  to  their  source,  has  become  a study  of  much 
interest  and  one  from  which  great  results  may  be  expected ; 
races  are  now  being  classed  by  the  affinity  of  language, 
rather  than  peculiarities  of  person.  The  amount  of  Indian 
words  and  roots  in  European  tongues  is  great,  the  same 
may  be  said  of  the  Polynesian  and  Malayan.  Thus  the 
Sanscrit  radiates  N.W.,  even  to  Britain,  and  S.E.,  to  New 
Zealand  and  throughout  Polynesia.  Much,  too,  might  be 
said  of  the  identity  of  manners,  customs,  and  religious  rites, 
which  are  similar  in  the  most  remote  parts  of  the  globe.  In 
all  these  we  behold  the  several  links  of  one  vast  chain, 
which  binds  together  the  whole  family  of  man.  The  cha- 


OUK  EACE  AND  ITS  OEIGIN. 


83 


racter  of  language,  too,  is  greatly  affected  by  climate  and 
local  circumstances.  It  is  not  tbe  skin  only  which  changes 
colour  with  change  of  place,  but  the  voice  and  its  tone  as 
well. 

The  evidence  of  language  is  irrefragable,  and  it  is  the 
only  evidence  worth  listening  to  with  regard  to  pre-historic 
periods.  It  would  have  been  next  to  impossible  to  discover 
any  traces  of  relationship  between  the  swarthy  natives  of 
India  and  their  conquerors,  whether  Alexander  or  Clive,  but 
for  the  testimony  borne  by  language.  What  other  evidence 
could  have  reached  back  to  times  when  Greece  was  not 
peopled  by  Greece,  nor  India  by  Hindus  ? What  authority 
would  have  been  strong  enough  to  persuade  the  Grecian 
army  that  their  gods  and  their  hero  ancestors  were  the  same 
as  those  of  King  Porus,  and  convince  the  English  soldier 
that  the  same  blood  was  running  in  his  veins  and  in  the 
veins  of  the  dark  Bengalese  ? And  yet  there  is  not  an 
English  jury  which,  after  examining  the  hoary  documents  of 
language,  would  reject  the  claim  of  a common  descent  and  a 
legitimate  relationship  between  Hindu,  Greek,  and  Teuton. 
Many  words  still  live  in  India  and  in  England  that  have 
witnessed  the  first  separation  of  the  Northern  and  Southern 
Aryans.  The  terms  for  God,  for  house,  for  father,  mother, 
son,  daughter,  for  dog  and  cow,  for  heart  and  tears,  for  axe 
and  tree,  identical  in  all  Indo-European  idioms,  are  like  the 
watchwords  of  soldiers.* 

When  it  is  considered  how  many  causes  are  continually 
working  together  to  change  and  alter  everything  in  nature, 
the  chemical  processes  and  combinations  which  are  ever 
going  on,  the  great  wonder  is  that  man  is  not  more  changed 
and  diverse  one  from  another  than  he  is,  and,  therefore,  in 
spite  of  difference  of  colour  and  other  peculiarities,  there  is 
still  such  a wonderful  amount  of  identity  between  man  and 
man,  from  whatever  part  of  the  globe  he  may  come,  and  of 
whatever  colour  he  may  be,  as  plainly  proves  all  have 
originally  sprung  from  one  and  the  same  source.  That 
widely  separated  and  dispersed  as  he  is,  cut  off  from  those 
* Max  Muller’s  “History  of  Ancient  Sanscrit  Literature"  p.  13. 

6 2 


84 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


advantages  in  one  part  which  are  possessed  in  another,  still 
the  outward  form,  however  variously  fashioned,  is  a casket 
containing  a spirit  which  is  alike  capable  of  enlargement  in 
all.  This  is  seen  in  the  early  history  of  the  coloured  race, 
which  is  generally  regarded  as  being  so  greatly  inferior  to 
the  white. 

It  appears  difficult  at  first  to  assign  a sufficient  reason  for 
that  strong  feeling  of  aversion  which  the  white  entertains  for 
the  colored  races.  It  does  not  seem  that  this  feeling  alto- 
gether depends  upon  color,  but  upon  other  circumstances 
as  well.  In  the  case  of  the  Maori,  many  are  scarcely  a shade 
darker  than  some  Europeans,  still  this  repugnance  exists;  it 
may,  perhaps,  be  in  some  measure  owing  to  the  Maori  being 
naturally  as  highly  endowed  as  ourselves,  and  from  this 
natural  strength  of  mind  not  being  counterbalanced  by  a 
corresponding  social  position.  Thus,  whilst  the  first  leads 
him  to  regard  himself  as  the  European's  equal,  the  second 
causes  the  European  to  disallow  the  claim;  he  sees  in  the 
Maori  a savage  who  does  not  pay  that  regard  to  outward 
appearances  which  he  does,  or  one  who  does  not  possess  the 
comforts  or  conveniences  of  life  which  belong  to  the  lowest 
European ; and,  therefore,  he  will  not  allow  him  to  be  his 
equal,  any  more  than  he  would  a wandering  gipsy  in  his 
native  land  to  be  of  equal  rank  with  himself,  however  great 
his  natural  abilities  may  be,  so  long  as  he  only  held  an 
inferior  position  and  appearance. 

When  the  unfortunate  war  commenced  in  New  Zealand, 
both  soldiers  and  sailors  looked  with  contempt  upon  the 
^niggers,"  as  they  called  the  Maori;  but  when  they  beheld 
the  calm  and  undaunted  way  with  which  they  resisted 
superior  European  force,  armed  with  infinitely  better 
weapons,  and  unlimited  supplies  of  food  and  ammunition, 
and  at  the  same  time  witnessed  the  skill  with  which  the 
Maori  laid  his  plans  and  raised  his  means  of  defence,  so  as  to 
equalize  as  much  as  possible  his  inferior  position  and  means 
of  resistance  to  those  brought  against  him,  then  their  best  and 
natural  feelings  were  drawn  out,  they  forgot  the  half- clad 
savage  in  the  brave  and  skilful  warrior ; and  even  when  he 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


85 


fell  into  tlie  soldier’s  hands  a prisoner,  those  feelings  of 
admiration  led  them  to  fraternise  with  the  man  they  had 
before  warred  with  and  viewed  as  an  inferior. 

Again ; much  of  this  feeling  arises  from  the  number  of  the 
natives  being  less  than  our  own.  In  former  times,  when  it 
was  the  contrary,  and  the  European  felt  he  was  dependent  in 
a great  measure  on  the  native  for  protection,  he  was  con- 
strained to  acknowledge  him  as  his  equal;  but  now,  this 
being  no  longer  the  case,  the  feelings  flow  back  in  the 
contrary  direction.  His  Maori  defender,  chief,  and  landlord 
— once  feared,  treated  with  respect,  and  even  fawned  upon, 
is  now  only  looked  on  as  a nigger,  clad  in  loathsome  garments. 
Still,  this  is  not  altogether  an  isolated  case.  The  highest 
caste  East  Indians  have  been  too  often  viewed  in  a similar 
way  by  our  countrymen — a sad  proof  of  narrow  mind  and 
contracted  ideas,  though  happily  this  feeling  is  generally 
giving  away  to  juster  ones. 

The  time  too  will  come  when  succeeding  generations  will 
trace  back  their  ancestry  with  pride  to  the  Maori  chief,  as  the 
American  in  many  instances  now  does  his  to  the  Bed  Indian 
warrior;  the  deeds,  wisdom,  and  bravery  of  those  now  re- 
viled, will  be  remembered  with  respect,  and  their  wonderful 
efforts  to  maintain  their  supremacy  of  race  will  be  viewed  as 
a proof  of  the  highest  kind  of  patriotism. 

After  the  dispersion  of  mankind,  it  is  probable  that  the 
children  of  Ham  first  represented  the  civilization  of  the  world, 
and  that  they  continued  to  do  so,  and  to  maintain  their  as- 
cendancy for  many  ages.  They  founded  the  oldest  kingdoms, 
first  originated  laws,  and  submitted  to  regular  government ; 
they  early  gave  their  attention  to  the  various  departments  of 
science,  invented  hieroglyphics,  and  afterwards  letters ; they 
also  turned  their  attention  to  painting,  sculpture  and  archi- 
tecture, nor  were  the  more  abstruse  sciences  unknown,  their 
knowledge  of  astronomy  is  a subject  of  wonder  even  in  the 
present  day.  It  is  remarkable  that  nearly  all  the  most  ancient, 
enduring,  and  surprising  monuments  of  human  industry  and 
skill  now  remaining,  were  reared  by  the  children  of  Ham ; 
whether  we  look  to  Egypt,  Babylon,  or  Nineveh,  the  imperish- 


86 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


able  pyramids,  built  in  a form  which  indicates  knowledge 
of  the  most  enduring  shape,  the  gorgeous  temples,  the 
gigantic  statues,  still  existing,  attest  the  departed  greatness 
of  their  builders.  Even  in  Europe  the  most  surprising, 
colossal,  and  ancient  works,  known  as  cyclopean,  must  be 
attributed  to  the  same  race. 

Whilst  the  coloured  section  of  the  human  family  was 
living  in  highly  polished  palaces  of  porphyry,  with  most  if 
not  all  the  comforts  of  modern  civilization,  clothed  in  the 
finest  raiment  of  dazzling  hues,  the  white  was  then  but  a 
wandering  savage,  haunting  the  forest  and  the  plain,  living 
in  hollow  trees,  caves,  or  wretchedly-contrived  huts,  and 
deriving  a precarious  subsistence  from  the  chase,  or  indi- 
genous products  of  the  soil,  roots,  nuts,  and  acorns. 

It  is  to  the  coloured  race  we  are  chiefly  indebted  for  all 
those  artificial  means  of  support  which  are  now  possessed. 
They  first  cultivated  the  cereal  grasses,  selected  those 
producing  the  largest  grain,  ground  the  wheat  in  mills  which 
they  invented,  and  made  the  flour  into  bread,  the  staff  of  life. 
They  found  out  the  art  of  weaving  cloth  from  the  fleece  and 
flax,  and  clothed  themselves  with  these  artificial  products 
instead  of  skins,  writing  on  leaves  of  the  papyrus,  from 
whence  we  derive  the  word  paper,  even  printing  too  was 
commenced  by  them  on  blocks.  They  likewise  had  dentists 
to  supply  the  defects  of  age,  and  manufactured  artificial  teeth 
of  ivory,  pot  and  wood,  set  in  palates  of  gold.  Every  art 
of  common  life  was  carefully  studied ; preparing  food  in  the 
most  palatable  form,  became  as  much  a professional  study 
with  the  ancient  Egyptian  cook,  as  the  cuisine  is  now  with 
the  polished  French,  or  the  still  more  skilful  Chinese.  Indeed 
the  progress  made  in  every  department  of  civilized  life, 
extending  even  unto  death  itself,  as  is  still  to  be  seen  in  the 
carefully  preserved  mummy  in  its  elaborately  prepared  coffin, 
is  such  as  to  excite  our  astonishment.  Nor  can  there  be 
much  doubt  on  the  subject,  as  both  the  pictures  of  ancient 
Egypt,  and  the  numerous  relics  of  its  former  days  still 
preserved  in  its  tombs,  plainly  attest.  The  architect  of  the 
celebrated  temple  of  Jerusalem  was  of  the  race  of  Ham,  and 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


87 


the  very  fact  of  Solomon  being  obliged  to  employ  Hiram, 
King  of  Tyre,  is  a proof  of  his  superior  civilization. 

Commerce,  too,  originated  with  the  same  race.  Long  be- 
fore the  celebrated  ship  Argo  (the  first  effort  of  the  white) 
ploughed  the  deep,  the  merchants  of  Tyre  and  Carthage  had 
even  then  visited  the  remote  shores  of  Britain,  and  given  it 
the  present  name,  Prit-tan,  island  of  tin.  They  had  perhaps 
circumnavigated  Africa,  had  penetrated  the  regions  of  the 
East,  and,  with  their  caravans,  passed  the  burning  deserts, 
which,  with  all  their  fiery  dangers,  could  not  arrest  their 
enterprising  course.  We  cannot,  therefore,  but  regard  the 
Hametic  race  as  the  fathers  and  founders  of  much  which 
elevates  and  enlarges  the  mind  of  man,  and  renders  him  the 
lord  of  the  creation. 

More  might  be  said  of  their  subduing  animals  to  maps 
use,  the  horse,  camel,  and  bulky  elephant,  as  well  as  the 
dog  and  cat,  making  them  the  sharers  of  his  hearth  ; the 
cow,  the  sheep,  and  domestic  fowl,  he  rendered  subservient 
to  his  will.  In  a later  day  the  Peruvians  tamed  the  llama 
and  alpaca,  and  so  with  the  Egyptian  share  the  honour  of 
domesticating  animals.  Even  their  wars  were  made  to  aid 
the  purpose  of  civilization,  by  instructing  those  they  subjected 
to  their  rule. 

Cadmus  and  Pelops  were  coloured  missionaries  to  the 
white,  they  carried  the  arts  and  sciences  of  Egypt  into  Greece, 
and  the  first  dawn  of  regeneration  came  to  the  children  of 
Japhet  from  those  of  Ham ; the  barbarous  Pelasgi  received 
their  rudiments  of  civilization  from  Egyptian  teachers. 

It  is  interesting  to  try  and  form  some  idea  of  the  probable 
range  of  influence  exercised  by  the  coloured  race  in  ancient 
times.  Commencing  with  Ham,  we  have  his  four  sons,  Cush, 
Misraim,  Phut,  and  Canaan.  Ham  appears  to  have  been  the 
builder  of  Babel,  but  his  descendant,  Nimrod,  became  the 
grand  founder  of  that  earliest  kingdom,  and  builder  of  many 
of  its  celebrated  monuments.  Hence  the  Hametic  race  may 
have  extended  by  Cush  into  India,  and  there  laid  the 
foundation  of  Indian  civilization,  where  much  of  their  religion, 
the  worship  of  the  cow,  the  same  order  and  number  of  castes 


88 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


still  remain.  Radiating  from  Babel,  Egypt  on  the  one  side 
and  Canaan  on  the  other  were  occupied. 

The  early  state  of  civilization  in  Canaan  is  seen  from  the 
references  made  to  it  in  the  Bible.  Its  colonies  carried  its 
arts  and  sciences  thence  to  Carthage.  From  Ham,  there- 
fore, may  Africa  and  a large  portion  of  Asia  have  become 
enlightened ; idolatry,  too,  may  have  originated  with  his 
descendants,  and  the  early  abandonment  of  the  worship  of 
the  true  God.  Hence,  though  its  first  rise  was  rapid,  yet, 
having  attained  the  summit  of  human  knowledge,  without 
possessing  the  ability  of  extending  it  to  spiritual  things,  its 
fall  became  inevitable. 

There  is  a certain  bound  which  human  wisdom  unaided 
from  above  cannot  pass ; it  has  been  the  case  with  Indian 
civilization,  it  was  so  with  that  of  the  race  of  Ham ; pro- 
fessing themselves  wise,  they  became  fools,  and  thus 
gradually  sank.  It  erected  its  noblest  temple,  reared  its 
loftiest  obelisk,  raised  its  highest  pyramid ; and,  unable 
to  do  more,  gradually  subsided  until  it  could  build  nothing 
beyond  the  clay  hovels  which  now  form  the  only  shelter  of 
Ham's  degenerate  descendants  ; and  wherever  they  are 
found,  there  the  curse  of  Noah  seems  to  have  followed  them. 
The  sons  of  Shem  and  Japhet  have  alike  conspired  to  place 
the  brand  of  slavery  upon  the  children  of  Ham,  and  even 
the  brown  race  of  New  Zealand  has  done  the  same  with  its 
first  sable  colonists.  Shem  early  steps  into  his  brother's 
inheritance,  tramples  upon  him  in  Asia,  confines  him  to 
Africa,  and  even  there  robs  him  of  his  chief  abodes,  leaving 
him  to  wander  over  the  desolate  portions  of  his  ancient 
patrimony. 

The  children  of  Shem  were  more  warlike,  but  it  is  ques- 
tionable whether  they  have  ever  been  more  civilized.  Their 
empires  were  larger,  but,  with  one  exception,  their  intel- 
lectual powers  were  not  more  developed,  and  that  exception 
was  Israel.  Enlightened  with  a knowledge  of  the  true  God, 
His  will,  and  the  way  of  life  eternal,  they  early  became  a 
light  shining  in  surrounding  darkness.  Long  inferior  to 
the  children  of  Ham  in  the  arts  of  civilized  life,  they  were 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


89 


still  superior  in  true  wisdom,  and  this  gave  them  a degree  of 
sanctity  and  moral  supremacy  in  the  sight  of  their  neighbours 
which  became  their  safety.  When  Joshua  led  Israel  into 
Canaan,  they  found  the  inhabitants  more  civilized  and 
powerful  than  themselves ; and  although,  under  Solomon, 
Israel  made  great  progress  in  the  arts,  yet  it  was  Hiram 
who  built  the  temple,  and  manned  his  fleets.  But,  whatever 
progress  was  made  in  his  reign,  was  soon  lost  in  succeeding 
ones. 

The  spiritual  knowledge  of  Solomon  was  so  extraordinary 
as  to  render  him  conspicuous  amongst  the  surrounding 
nations.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  herself,  the  sable  monarch  of 
the  children  of  Ham,  came  to  hear  his  wisdom.  So,  like- 
wise, when  God  honoured  that  race  which  alone  continued 
to  worship  him,  by  sending  His  Son  to  take  human  form 
and  dwell  amongst  men,  it  was  as  one  of  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham ; and,  again,  we  find  the  representative  of  Candace, 
Queen  of  Ethiopia,  coming  to  worship  at  Jerusalem.  Shem 
became  a teacher  to  his  brethren  in  Africa  and  in  Europe. 
Widely  as  they  were  separated,  he  brought  the  Hue  light  to 
both.  The  chief  teachers  of  the  world  arose  from  him  : 
Zoroaster,  as  well  as  Moses;  Christ  the  Messiah,  the  true 
light ; and  Mahomet,  the  false  prophet. 

The  powerful  kingdoms  of  Shem  were  scarcely  set  up  and 
made  conspicuous,  before  the  despised  sons  of  Japhet,  who 
were  once  viewed  as  barbarians,  overturned  them.  Alexander 
destroyed  the  empire  of  Darius,  and  established  his  own  in 
its  place.  The  Greek  gave  way  to  the  Homan,  and,  in  that 
empire's  decline,  other  powers  arose  amongst  the  sons  of 
Japhet,  which  extended  their  enterprise  beyond  the  limits  of 
the  old  world.  A new  one  is  opened  to  their  wondering 
gaze,  and  the  white  then  first  meets  the  red  section  of  his 
race;  in  the  distant  East,  he  encounters  the  yellow — the 
long-hidden  Chinese,  with  his  quaint  civilization ; the  Hindu, 
the  inhabitants  of  India  and  those  of  the  innumerable 
islands  of  the  sea. 

God  is  pleased  to  restore  J aphet  to  his  birth-right ; makes 
him  the  keeper  of  His  Word;  and,  enlightening  him  with  it. 


90 


OUR  RACE  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 


sends  him  forth  to  the  uttermost  bounds  of  the  earth,  to  teach 
his  benighted  brethren  ; he  thus  fulfils  the  prophecy  of  Noah, 
and  dwells  in  the  tents  of  Shem  as  his  friend  and  teacher. 
God  makes  him  his  agent  in  giving  freedom,  spiritual  as 
well  as  temporal,  to  the  children  of  Ham.  Japhet  attains 
a deeper  knowledge  of  nature  and  its  laws,  with  a loftier 
view  of  God  and  His  attributes,  a more  correct  estimate 
of  man’s  mission  on  earth;  and  thus,  with  the  highest  de- 
gree of  civilization  and  its  humanizing  tendency,  arising 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  Creator,  he  becomes  admirably 
adapted  for  the  office  of  the  world’s  teacher,  the  great 
dispenser  of  God’s  will,  and  the  pioneer  of  that  perfec- 
tion which  man  is  destined  to  reach  when  all  the  glorious 
designs  of  Providence  shall  receive  their  full  consummation ; 
and  the  three  sons  of  Noah  shall  again  be  united  as  the 
members  of  one  family,  ever  more  to  live  in  peace  and 
harmony  together. 


A GREEN  JADE  MERE,  OR  PATU  POUNAMU,  PRESENTED  TO  THE  QUEEN. 


A WATA,  OR  FOOD  STORE. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

CIVILIZATION. 

There  is  scarcely  any  word  more  familiarly  or  generally  used 
than  that  of  Civilization ; and  yet  perhaps  few  less  easy  to 
be  defined. 

The  wdiole  world  is  divided  into  the  civilized  and  uncivi- 
lized. All  aboriginal  races  are  spoken  of  as  belonging  to 
the  latter.  The  Indian,  Australian,  African,  Polynesian, 
and  even  the  Hindu,  Chinese,  and  Japanese,  are  generally 
included  in  this  category.  In  fact,  the  term  uncivilized 
seems  to  apply  as  much  to  colour  as  to  anything  else.  It 
cannot  be  denied  that  it  has  a great  deal  to  do  with  the 
general  idea  of  civilization  entertained  by  our  race,  and  that 
different  nations  are  classed  according  to  their  several  shades ; 
thus,  the  Polynesian  being  much  lighter  than  the  negro  or 
Australian,  is  placed  before  him  in  general  estimation. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  Colour  be  faultless,  we  quietly 


92 


CIVILIZATION. 


class  such  amongst  the  civilised,  though,  in  many  respects,  far 
behind  some  of  the  coloured  sections  of  the  human  family, 
and  by  reckless  deeds,  readiness  to  shed  blood,  and  mental 
degradation,  prove  they  are  as  much  entitled  to  be  classed 
amongst  the  uncivilized  as  any  of  their  darker  coloured 
brethren. 

Before  the  word  * civilized  ’ can  be  correctly  applied,  it  is 
necessary  to  find  out  its  origin  and  true  meaning.  The 
word  is  evidently  derived  from  civis  or  civitas , and  this  opens 
up  a page  of  ancient  history,  when  men  first  consorted  to- 
gether for  mutual  protection  and  maintenance  of  their 
individual  rights,  not  only  against  foreign  foes  but  also  those 
amongst  themselves,  who  by  superior  strength  of  numbers 
obtained  such  a degree  of  power  as  to  endanger  individual 
life  and  liberty.  This  has  ever  been  necessary  when  com- 
munities attained  such  a state  as  to  be  sensible  of  their  rights, 
and  capable  of  combining  together  to  maintain  them.  The 
commencement  of  such  a compact  seems  to  be  fear.  The 
first  man  who  is  recorded  as  having  built  a city  was  Cain, 
who,  when  driven  forth  as  a wanderer,  expressed  his  fear  lest 
everybody  who  found  him  should  slay  him.  Continually 
pursued  by  this  fear,  when  his  family  became  sufficiently 
numerous  after  the  birth  of  his  son  Enoch,  he  built  a city 
and  called  it  by  his  name,  evidently  hoping  by  this  concen- 
tration of  his  children  in  one  spot  to  secure  his  own  safety. 

In  lawless  times,  when  might  was  right  and  club  law  pre- 
vailed, this  was  the  only  way  which  the  weak  possessed  of 
offering  effective  resistance  to  those  who  would  oppress  them. 
Hence  arose  communis- — common  rights.  These  still  exist 
in  England  as  well  as  in  New  Zealand,  where  lands  are  thus 
held  and  cultivated  either  in  common  or  by  each  confining 
his  labor  to  his  own  particular  allotment.  This  work  was 
originally  performed  by  the  entire  community  at  the  same 
time,  and  armed  for  mutual  protection . 

As  these  communities  increased  cities  gradually  arose, 
houses  were  erected  contiguous,  and  surrounded  by  walls  to 
defend  them  from  sudden  assaults.  Thus  the  citizens,  when 
able  to  maintain  themselves  against  such  attacks,  gradually 


CIVILIZATION. 


93 


acquired  a certain  position  with  their  rulers,  which  enabled 
them  not  only  to  maintain  their  rights,  but  to  obtain  various 
immunities,  dignities,  and  privileges,  for  as  they  became 
wealthy  and  able  to  furnish  their  prince  efficient  aid  in 
times  of  war,  it  was  his  interest  to  attach  them  to  him  by 
such  means. 

But  with  all  their  powers,  though  they  could  even  close 
their  cities  against  their  rulers,  as  the  Lord  Mayor  of  London, 
for  formas  sake,  still  locks  the  gate  of  the  city  when  the 
monarch  visits  it  to  assert  his  rights,  then  opens  it,  and 
presents  the  keys  to  her,  yet,  with  all  their  powers  and 
immunities,  they  were  obliged  to  be  humble  and  lowly  to 
their  rulers,  hence  came  the  word  civil  and  civility , for  which 
the  citizen  became  conspicuous,  as  well  as  for  his  loyalty,  a 
noble  instance  of  which  occurred  when  Walworth,  the  Lord 
Mayor  of  London,  himself  knocked  down  the  daring  rebel 
who  insulted  his  King  in  his  presence. 

Cities  early  became  the  source  of  every  useful  art  and 
invention.  The  city  was  the  civilizer  of  the  country,  and 
not  the  court,  for  though  from  it  sprung  the  courtier , and 
every  thing  that  was  courtly  and  courteous , and  from  them 
the  lady  learnt  the  graceful  courtsey ; still  it  did  not  give 
rise  to  such  temporal  and  moral  benefits  as  the  city.  The 
immorality  of  courts  is  but  too  faithfully  preserved  in  the 
word  courtezan.  In  searching  for  the  true  meaning  of 
civilization,  we  find  the  Romans  first  derived  theirs  from 
the  Greeks,  and  if  we  turn  to  them  and  take  their  word 
for  city,  ttoXiq,  we  have  everything  relating  to  law,  order, 
and  government  implied,  as  police , polity , policy , and  poli- 
tics ; as  well  as  politeness  and  urbanity , also  derived  from 
city,  urbsj  which  marks  the  well-ordered  mind  careful  of 
giving  offence,  hence  the  words  'polite , politic , and  polish  of 
manners  thus  acquired.  The  Greek  cities  were  independent 
states,  their  citizens  were  men  of  rank  and  education,  bound 
together  by  mutual  interests  ; they  were  celebrated  for 
their  cultivation  of  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  thus  became 
polished.  Having  cities  similarly  situated  in  their  neigh- 
bourhood, each  possessing  its  peculiar  interests,  leading  to 


94 


CIVILIZATION. 


constant  communications  between  them,  politics  were  dis- 
cussed to  arrange  the  political  position  of  each,  and  preserve 
the  proper  balance  of  power  amongst  them  all,  so  as  to 
ensure  permanent  peace. 

Thus,  as  the  populous  cities  maintained  their  position  and 
unity  of  action  by  strict  observance  of  law,  the  establishment 
of  it  by  defining  mutual  rights  and  maintaining  them,  led  them 
naturally  to  become  polite  towards  each  other ; the  citizens, 
instead  of  passing  their  time  in  fighting  and  quarrelling,  sought 
rather  to  employ  it  usefully  for  their  own  advancement,  by 
developing  the  mind,  as  the  best  way  of  increasing  their  true 
power  and  influence,  this  gradually  extended  to  the  country 
at  large;  from  gens  is  derived  gentleman , and  every  thing 
that  is  genteel  and  gentle . 

Communities  so  bound  together  by  mutual  interest,  formed 
what  is  called  Society,  and  this  association  with  each  other 
gave  rise  to  that  sociality  and  intercourse  which  marks  true 
civilization. 

If,  however,  the  germs  of  civilization  are  to  be  ascribed 
primarily  to  law  and  order,  to  attain  a state  of  perfect  civili- 
zation, men  must  advance  a step  further ; it  is  not  sufficient 
that  they  should  be  restrained  from  doing  wrong  to  one 
another  from  fear  of  the  law ; a higher  motive  is  required, 
and  that  is  the  fear  of  God,  which  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. 
When  the  goodness  of  God  is  realized,  then  love  must  beget 
love,  and  the  love  of  God  will  lead  to  the  fear  of  doing  any- 
thing which  will  grieve  His  good  Spirit.  Love,  therefore, 
will  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  and  the  servant  of  God  will 
seek  to  live  as  ever  being  in  His  presence.  To  this  effect  is 
the  exhortation  of  the  Apostle  : Be  ye  all  of  one  mind, 
having  compassion  one  of  another;  love  as  brethren,  be 
pitiful,  be  courteous.”  (1  Pet.  iii.  8.)  Another  Apostle 
exhorts : u If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  live 
peaceably  with  all  men.”  (Rom.  xii.  18.)  “ See  that  none 

render  evil  for  evil  unto  any  man ; but  ever  follow  that  which 
is  good,  both  among  yourselves,  and  to  all  men.”  (1  Thess. 
v.  15.) 

This  was  only  carrying  out  more  perfectly  under  the 


CIVILIZATION. 


95 


Christian  dispensation  that  which  had  previously  been  com- 
menced under  the  Jewish,  and  by  adherence  to  which  the 
little  land  of  Canaan  was  enabled  to  preserve  its  individuality 
and  existence  in  the  midst  of  the  then  mighty  nationalities 
of  the  world  which  surrounded  it.  When,  however,  true 
Christianity  is  established  and  its  glorious  principles  are 
fully  carried  out,  men  will  learn  war  no  more,  but  will 
convert  the  sword  into  the  ploughshare  and  the  spear  into 
the  pruning  hook,  and  perfect  peace  will  prevail  ; the 
lamb  will  lie  down  with  the  lion,  and  the  weaned  child  will 
place  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice’s  den  with  impunity ! Then 
knowledge  will  be  increased,  for  the  fear  of  Cod  will  be  the 
stability  of  the  times.  When  all  this  comes  to  pass,  the  whole 
family  of  man  will  be  truly  civilized ; to  that  state  we  are  only 
approximating,  for  whilst  wars  continue  to  be  waged,  and 
men  devote  their  abilities  to  invent  destructive  instru- 
ments of  the  greatest  power,  they  cannot  be  said  to  be  so ; 
the  nearest  approach  to  true  civilization  is  the  nearest  ap- 
proach made  to  the  law  of  love,  and  conceding  equal  rights 
to  all.  Britain  made  a grand  step  towards  civilization  when 
she  broke  the  chain  of  the  slave,  and  pronounced  all  men  free 
who  stood  on  her  shores,  and  gave  twenty  millions  to  make 
them  so.  The  recently  reclaimed  cannibal  of  New  Zealand 
too  made  no  little  step  towards  civilization  when  he,  of 
his  own  accord,  pronounced  his  slaves  to  be  free,  though  by 
so  doing  he  lost  their  services,  without  receiving  any  re- 
muneration in  return,  beyond  the  conviction  of  having 
acted  up  to  his  Christian  profession ; this  noble  proof  of 
sincerity  also  was  given  not  many  years  after  Britain  first 
set  the  world  an  example,  and  whilst  slavery  still  existed 
amongst  the  Christian  States  of  enlightened  America. 

The  general  and  increasing  intercourse  between  the  various 
sections  of  the  human  race  by  the  aid  of  steam,  rail,  and 
electricity,  the  spread  of  God’s  Word  (the  grand  source  of 
civilization)  translated  into  every  tongue  and  sent  to  every 
land,  betoken  the  speedy  advent  of  that  grand  social  change, 
when  all  the  severed  parts  of  the  human  family  shall  be 
brought  together,  and  feel  that  they  are  members  of  the 
same  body  politic,  of  which  the  head  is  Christ. 


96 


CIVILIZATION. 


A kind  of  rudimentary  civilization,  however,  is  to  be  traced 
even  amongst  those  aboriginal  races  which  seem  to  be  the 
furthest  from  it  The  Maori  was  most  particular  in  what  he 
said  lest  he  should  give  offence,  knowing  that  the  conse- 
quences were  certain  to  be  bloodshed  and  the  commence- 
ment of  feuds,  which  might  last  for  years.  This  was 
especially  observable  after  he  had  received  the  Gospel. 
Quarrels  since  that  period  have  been  rare  amongst  them- 
selves. 

Christianity  has  led  to  union,  and  this  has  been  attained 
by  paying  attention  to  the  Gospel  precept — avoiding  as  much 
as  possible  the  giving  of  offence,  and  this  has  only  to  be  con- 
tinued to  produce  the  natural  fruits  of  peace — the  cultivation 
of  arts  and  sciences.  In  this  respect,  although  the  Hindu, 
Chinese,  and  Japanese,  possess  many  or  rather  most  of  the 
comforts  and  conveniences  of  life,  and  though  the  two  latter 
especially  have  laws  and  fixed  governments,  still  not  having 
the  true  principle  of  union  and  cohesion  amongst  themselves — 
the  fear  of  God — life,  liberty,  property,  are  all  as  insecure  there 
as  they  were  amongst  the  most  renowned  nations  of  old,  which 
however  superior  in  general  knowledge  to  the  Israelites,  were 
still  regarded  by  them  as  Gentiles  and  barbarians.  It  is  the 
law  which  is  a schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ,  and  it  is 
Christ  only  who  can  carry  us  on  to  perfection,  the  true  civi- 
lization of  soul. 


AN  ANCIENT  BELL  FOUND  AT  WANGAREI. 


NATIVE  CHURCH  AT  OTAKE  MANGANUI-A-TE-AO. 


CHAPTER  V. 

RELIGION. 

The  religion  of  a people  is  in  a great  measure  its  history  •, 
it  gives  an  insight  into  the  mental  development,  as  well  as 
the  state  of  society  attained.  The  thoughts  of  religion  even 
amongst  the  most  depraved  sections  of  the  human  race, 
furnish  a proof  of  man’s  immortal  nature,  and  his  natural 
aspirings  after  it.  However  rude  the  ideas  of  God,  and 
absurd  the  worship  offered,  still  in  them  is  seen  the  infancy 
of  the  immortal  mind  and  superior  being.  In  the  universal 
existence  of  religious  rites,  there  is  also  a strong  evidence 
of  the  unity  of  the  human  race  ; this  is  especially  to  be 
detected  in  the  general  resemblance  which  is  found  to  pre- 
vail in  all  religions,  and  which  can  be  traced  step  by  step  to 
the  very  commencement  of  man’s  history. 

The  simple  communing  of  the  soul  with  God,  so  graphi- 
cally alluded  to  in  Genesis,  when  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God 
was  heard  walking  in  the  cool  of  the  evening  amongst  the 
trees  of  the  garden,  man’s  first  happy  abode  and  cradle  of  his 

H 


98 


RELIGION. 


earliest  days,  seems  to  perpetuate  the  first  worship  offered  to 
the  Maker.  The  fidelity  of  that  narrative  is  evidenced  by 
the  primitive  rites  of  every  race,,  which  prove  how  firmly 
impressed  upon  the  human  mind,,  and  how  fondly  treasured 
was  the  remembrance  of  those  blissful  days,  when  the  grand 
progenitor  drew  nigh  to  his  Creator  in  the  solemn  evening 
shade  of  the  trees  of  Eden.  This  has  ever  been  looked  back 
to  as  the  golden  age,  of  which  almost  every  nation  has 
preserved  some  cherished  recollection.  It  is  to  be  traced 
through  each  subsequent  period  of  man's  history  when  a 
wanderer  far  from  that  happy  spot,  his  race  became  widely 
dispersed  over  the  surface  of  the  globe.  The  remembrance 
of  the  trees  of  Eden  went  with  him.  The  Patriarchal 
Church  had  its  groves  and  oaks;  they  were  its  sanctuary, 
beneath  their  sacred  shade  those  early  worshippers  drew 
nigh  unto  God.  From  Phoenicia,  where  still  the  Druse 
remains,  the  sacred  grove  reached  Britain,  where  long  the 
Druid  ministered  amongst  his  venerated  trees. 

Perhaps  in  the  celebrated  hanging  gardens  of  Babylon 
this  worship  existed.  The  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  thus 
used  their  gardens,  and  on  their  high  places  stood  the  sacred 
grove.  In  Africa's  length  and  breadth  the  same  is  found  ; 
in  India's  dim-lighted  caves  and  temples,  as  well  as  in  those 
of  Egypt,  the  representation  of  the  solemn  gloom  of  the 
forest  is  to  be  detected ; and  even  in  Sion's  sacred  adytum, 
its  holy  of  holies,  amidst  its  carved  palm  trees,  was  the  same 
recollection  preserved. 

From  the  furthest  east  to  America,  in  the  Teocalli,  Deocolle , 
crowned  with  the  sacred  tree,  to  the  Polynesian  marae  and 
wahi  tapu  of  New  Zealand,  is  this  earliest  form  of  worship 
found,  which  has  thus  encircled  the  entire  globe,  for  even  the 
Australian  savage  requires  the  gloom  of  the  forest  in  which  to 
celebrate  his  midnight  rites ; amidst  the  trees  they  inter  their 
dead,  and  on  them  in  hieroglyphics  inscribe  the  name,  cha- 
racter, family,  and  tribe  of  the  deceased.  The  sacred  grove 
of  the  Maori  formed  the  most  conspicuous  feature  in  his  reli- 
gion, the  very  name  of  which  preserved  its  character,  being 
Te  Rctkau  Tapu — the  sacred  tree.  In  the  grove  the  priest 


RELIGION. 


99 


performed  his  mystic  rites ; there  he  professed  to  hold 
converse  with  his  gods,  and  thence  brought  back  their 
responses. 

Not  only  in  the  sacred  grove  were  their  greatest  chiefs 
interred,  but  they  were  placed  on  stages  amongst  the 
branches  of  some  ancient  tree,  or  in  the  hollow  of  a time- 
worn trunk.  The  spirits  of  departed  chiefs  were  supposed 
to  abide  within  their  precincts,  and  to  afflict  with  disease 
any  who  profanely  intruded  within  them.  Grove-worship 
seems  naturally  to  have  been  connected  with  that  of  isolated 
trees ; the  remembrance  of  the  tree  of  life  is  still  preserved 
in  the  reverence  paid  by  the  Brahmin  and  Buddhist  to  the 
sacred  tree,  Deodar,  planted  by  the  side  of  their  temples,  as 
the  yew  is  by  ours.  The  fetish  tree  is  found  throughout 
Africa,  as  well  as  New  Zealand,  Polynesia,  and  throughout 
the  southern  hemisphere. 

Whilst  the  human  race  seems  to  have  preserved  a remem- 
brance of  the  trees  of  Eden  and  the  happiness  once  enjoyed 
beneath  their  shade,  they  seem  likewise  never  to  have  for- 
gotten their  fall,  and  the  Evil  One  by  whom  it  was  effected, 
as  well  as  the  form  he  assumed.  Serpent-worship  is  co-eval 
and  co-extensive  with  that  of  the  grove ; wherever  one  is 
found  the  other  is  also.  Traces  of  its  former  existence  are 
still  to  be  seen  even  in  England ; near  Abury  yet  remain 
the  relics  of  a gigantic  serpent  monument,  in  four  hundred 
and  sixty-one  oblong  blocks  of  stone,  which  for  more  than 
two  miles  once  traced  the  huge  coils  of  the  serpent  amongst 
the  Downs  of  Wiltshire.  Throughout  the  whole  world,  in 
the  present  as  well  as  past  ages,  are  proofs  of  this  worship  to 
be  found.  To  it  may  be  added  that  of  the  grand  luminaries 
of  heaven,  symbolized  by  fire ; the  ancient  faith  of  Zoroaster, 
is  still  preserved  by  the  Guebres  and  Parsees  of  the  present 
day.  The  round  towers  of  Ireland,  and  the  many  places 
in  that  island  still  called  after  Baal,  attest  the  universality 
of  this  worship.  The  moon  and  stars  were  reverenced  by  a 
section  of  the  Maori  race,  and  the  sacred  fire  may  be  said  to 
have  burnt  in  every  house. 

The  universal  existence  of  these  several  forms  lead  to  one 

h 2 


100 


RELIGION. 


conclusion,  at  which  it  seems  impossible  to  avoid  arriving, 
and  that  is,  the  unity  of  the  human  race ; and  seeing  that 
these  are  alluded  to  in  Scripture,  they  indicate  one  common 
age  of  the  human  family.  In  fact,  the  fragmentary  remains 
of  Scriptural  knowledge  to  be  found  amongst  the  different 
sections  of  our  race  in  the  most  remote  and  distant  parts  of 
our  globe,  are  satisfactory  evidences  of  the  same,  and  were 
missionaries  carefully  to  collect  and  record  them,  they  would 
render  essential  service  to  the  establishment  of  truth. 

In  preserving  the  myths  of  the  heathen,  truth  is  thereby 
to  be  discovered,  concealed  indeed  beneath  the  disguise  with 
which  tradition  and  spiritual  darkness  have  enshrouded  it; 
thus  the  creation  of  the  world,  of  man,  and  his  fall,  are  to 
be  discovered  even  in  the  Maori  myths. 

As  light  and  life  are  represented  by  Tama  nui  te  Ra,  the 
great  son  of  day,  so  is  Hades  by  Hine-nui-te-po,  the  great 
mother  night,  into  which  all  must  fall.  Maui,  the  great  hero 
god  of  the  Maori  mythology,  is  represented  as  having  length- 
ened the  day  by  beating  the  sun  and  rendering  him  lame, 
which  is  perhaps  only  a figurative  way  of  recording  the  fact  of 
their  having  come  from  the  tropics  to  the  temperate  clime  of 
New  Zealand,  where  the  days  are  necessarily  longer  than  in 
Hawaiki.  Determined  still  further  to  show  his  strength  by 
prolonging  man's  life  and  destroying  the  power  of  Hades,  or 
death,  Maui  determined  to  enter  the  infernal  regions  during 
the  period  of  the  day,  when  Hine-nui-te-po  was  supposed  to 
sleep,  to  pass  through  therealmsof  night  and  re-entering  those 
of  light,  so  to  destroy  the  power  of  the  grave,  but  he  found 
that  death  never  slept.  Maui  failed ; he  was  unequal  to  the 
work  of  saving  man  or  even  himself ; he  could  not  return, 
night  closed  her  portals,  Maui  perished,  and  so  like  him 
all  have  died  ; had  he  succeeded  there  would  have  been 
no  death  in  the  world,  but  when  he  failed,  death  became 
the  general  lot  of  all.  Do  we  not  here  trace  a reference  to 
death  being  entailed  on  us  through  the  failure  of  our  first 
parent. 

The  propitiating  God  by  sacrifice  was  likewise  general, 
even  the  heathen  have  felt  the  truth,  without  shedding  of 


RELIGION. 


101 


blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin ; here  again  is  another 
connecting  link  with  Scriptural  truth  to  be  discerned. 

In  one  part  of  New  Zealand  an  expiation  for  sin  was  felt 
to  be  necessary ; a service  was  performed  over  an  individual, 
by  which  all  the  sins  of  the  tribe  were  supposed  to  be  trans- 
ferred to  him,  a fern  stalk  was  previously  tied  to  his  person, 
with  which  he  jumped  into  the  river  and  there  unbinding, 
allowed  it  to  float  away  to  the  sea,  bearing  their  sins  with 
it ; here  again  is  another  fragment  of  Scripture  seen,  an 
evident  allusion  to  the  scape  goat.  There  is  a reference  to 
the  flood  in  the  legend  of  Tawaki  another  god,  who  in  his 
anger  stamped  on  the  crystal  firmament  or  icy  pavement  of 
heaven  and  cracked  it,  thus  the  waters  above  burst  through 
and  deluged  the  earth. 

In  the  Wharekura,  their  traditional  temple  in  Hawaiki, 
where  all  their  tribes  used  to  assemble,  and  quarrelling, 
were  dispersed  never  to  unite  again,  may  be  traced  a min- 
gled account  of  Babel  and  the  temple,  when  the  union  of 
the  tribes  was  destroyed  in  the  time  of  Rehoboam.  And 
even  still  later,  in  the  myth  of  Tawaki,  may  be  seen  some 
of  the  leading  features  of  the  Saviours  history,  his  healing 
the  blindness  of  his  grandmother  by  spitting  on  the  ground, 
making  clay,  and  anointing  her  eyes  with  it ; his  appearing 
in  vile  raiment  in  the  garb  of  a servant,  ascending  a moun- 
tain, then  casting  it  aside  and  clothing  himself  with  the 
lightning,  thus  manifesting  himself  to  be  a god,  we  see 
a clear  reference  to  the  Saviour’s  transfiguration  on  the 
mount ; in  Tawaki  being  killed  by  his  own  brethren,  then 
restoring  himself  to  life  and  ascending  up  to  heaven,  there 
is  a close  remembrance  of  the  Saviour,  and  one  which  struck 
even  the  Maori  themselves  with  astonishment  when  they 
first  had  the  New  Testament  given  them. 

Many  other  similar  instances  might  be  adduced  to  show 
that  there  are  remnants  of  a knowledge  of  the  Saviour  per- 
vading the  whole  of  Polynesia.  Captain  Cook  was  taken  by 
the  Sandwich  Islanders  for  Orono,  whose  history  closely 
resembles  that  of  Tawaki ; when  he  left  the  earth  it  was 
with  the  promise  of  returning  again  ; his  second  advent 


102 


RELIGION. 


was  constantly  looked  for,  and  when  the  distinguished 
navigator  appeared  he  was  at  once  taken  for  that  celes- 
tial being  ; divine  honors  were  bestowed  upon  him  and 
sacrifices  offered,  he  was  placed  upon  their  sacred  stage 
or  altar  and  there  worshipped.  Wherever  he  went  the 
people  prostrated  themselves  to  the  ground  until  he  passed 
by.  The  first  man  was  said  to  have  been  formed  of  the  red 
feruginous  mud  found  in  swamps,  and  thus  might  have  been 
called  Adam.  It  does  not  appear  unlikely  that  the  Mela- 
nesian race  retained  some  remembrance  of  the  myth  of 
Osiris,  which  in  a later  period,  when  the  Polynesian  arrived, 
was  mixed  up  with  their  recollections  of  their  Messiah ; the 
death  of  Tawaki  was  occasioned  by  the  reptile  gods,  as  that 
of  Osiris  was  by  Typhon. 

The  singular  sect  or  society,  the  Areoi  of  Tahaiti,  may 
have  originated  with  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  to  which 
their  practices  seem  to  bear  a close  resemblance.  The 
Tohunga,  or  priests,  are  also  physicians  ; and  it  is  a remark- 
able fact,  that  they  only  were  acquainted  with  the  botany  of 
their  country  and  the  medical  virtues  or  qualities  of  plants, 
and  further  that  the  practice  of  medicine  amongst  them  was 
invariably  combined  with  their  religious  rites.  Medicine 
alone  was  not  deemed  efficacious,  it  must  be  accompanied 
with  karakia,  or  spells,  and  those  were  suited  to  the  part  of 
the  body  affected,  as  the  Australians  profess  to  cure  the  bite 
of  any  serpent,  provided  they  know  what  kind  it  was  which 
inflicted  the  wound,  so  the  Maori  Tohunga,  when  he  knew 
what  part  of  the  body  was  affected,  had  his  proper  spells 
and  medicine  to  drive  the  reptile  from  that  part  in  which 
he  was  supposed  to  dwell. 

Prayer  and  medicine  are  still  combined  by  the  New 
Zealanders ; when  they  administer  the  one  it  is  followed  by 
the  other,  and  when  the  pains  of  the  sufferer  are  great, 
prayer  is  often  continued  during  the  whole  night.  This 
union  of  prayer  and  medicine  seems  to  have  been  used  in 
very  remote  times  ; it  certainly  was  in  the  days  of  the 
Apostles,  when  in  the  infancy  of  the  medical  art  the  anoint- 
ing with  oil,  the  grand  remedy  for  most  if  not  all  diseases, 


RELIGION. 


103 


was  always  accompanied  with  prayer.  (See  James  v.  15.) 
Another  office  of  the  priest  was  that  of  the  moko  mokai,  or 
embalming  of  the  heads  of  relatives,  which  was  likewise  the 
office  of  the  Egyptian  physicians  and  priests.  This  union  of 
the  two  seems  to  have  pervaded  the  whole  heathen  world ; 
it  is  preserved  by  the  Red  Indian  in  the  name  of  the  medi- 
cine man  who  attended  to  the  bodily  and  spiritual  health  of 
the  people. 

The  New  Zealand  priest  could  rule  the  winds,  render  them 
favorable  for  fishing,  restrain  the  malignance  of  evil  spirits, 
destroy  the  power  of  witchcraft,  and  hold  converse  with  the 
gods ; he  could  likewise  enchant,  bewitch,  and  destroy  his 
enemy  by  his  spells,  and  controul  the  powers  of  nature. 
How  similar  to  the  African  rain-makers,  the  wizards  of  the 
northern  tribes,  the  Finns  and  Lapps,  the  Angekoks  of  the 
Esquimaux,  the  Shamans  of  Siberia,  the  Brahmins  of  India, 
Bonzes  of  China,  the  Druids  and  Magi  of  old.  We  have  still, 
even  in  England,  wise  men  and  women  who  profess  to  tell 
secrets  and  discover  things  stolen  ; the  very  same  characters 
are  to  be  met  with  in  New  Zealand  and  Polynesia,  who  lay 
claim  to  similar  powers.  Perhaps  the  gipsy  brought  that 
knowledge  with  him  from  India,  and  thence  also  the  Poly- 
nesian acquired  it. 

Necromancy,  which  has  existed  from  the  time  of  the  witch 
of  Endor,  and  has  so  strangely  and  greatly  revived  in  enlight- 
ened Britain  and  the  United  States,  is  a relic  of  the  most 
ancient  times,  and  is  still  devoutly  believed  in  by  the  Maori 
and  Polynesian  races ; in  fact,  the  spiritualism  of  the  pre- 
sent day  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  demonology,  and 
though  it  pervades  the  southern  hemisphere,  it  is  actually 
at  present  less  openly  practised  there  amongst  the  heathen 
than  in  these  enlightened  countries.  It  may  be  disguised 
under  various  names  of  spirit-rapping,  mediums,  and  ma- 
nifestations ; their  seances  are  either  a gross  deception 
or  nothing  else  than  demonology ; and  it  is  a singular 
instance  of  identity  of  practice  between  the  most  civilized 
and  uncivilized  portions  of  mankind,  when  we  find  the 
enlightened  races  of  one  hemisphere  treading  in  the  steps  of 


104 


RELIGION. 


the  unenlightened  African  of  the  other ; it  is  however  a clear 
proof  that,  when  men  forget  their  God;  they  fall  into  the 
same  vain  practices  whatever  may  be  their  race;  whether 
black  or  white. 

The  Maori  gods  were  demons,  whose  evil  designs  could 
only  be  counteracted  by  powerful  spells  and  charms  ; these 
proving  effectual,  sacrifices  and  offerings  were  made  to  soothe 
the  vanquished  spirits  and  appease  their  wrath.  Rehua,  whose 
abode  was  placed  in  the  highest  of  their  ten  heavens,  appears 
to  have  been  the  best  of  them  all,  and  on  that  account  to  have 
had  the  chief  abode  assigned  him  ; he  was  supposed  to  mani- 
fest himself  in  meteors.  The  gods  in  general  appeared  in  the 
whirlwind  and  lightning,  answering  their  votaries  in  the  clap 
of  thunder.  The  inferior  beings  made  themselves  visible  in 
the  form  of  lizards,  moths,  butterflies,  spiders,  and  even 
flies ; when  they  spoke  it  was  in  a low  whistling  tone.  They 
were  supposed  to  be  so  numerous  as  to  surround  the  living 
in  crowds,  hei  te  muia  nga  wairua  penei  nga  wairoa , ‘ the 
spirits  throng  like  musquitoes/  ever  watching  to  inflict  evil. 
The  nearest  and  most  beloved  relatives  were  supposed  to 
have  their  natures  changed  by  death,  and  to  become  malig- 
nant, even  towards  those  they  formerly  loved,  although  there 
are  exceptions,  where  spirits  have  refused  to  admit  their 
relatives  into  Hades,  thrusting  them  away  with  friendly 
violence,  and  the  command  to  go  back  and  take  care  of 
some  beloved  one  left  behind. 

Spirits  and  gods  were  supposed  to  require  food  as  well  as 
man,  but  they  only  consumed  the  essence  or  spirit  of  it,  the 
gross  substance  being  left  for  the  priests.  In  sleep  the  soul 
was  supposed  to  quit  the  body  and  wander  about  holding 
converse  with  its  friends,  and  then  returning  again  to  its 
body ; dreams  were  viewed  as  realities.  Aituas  or  omens 
were  supposed  to  be  sent  as  warnings,  and  everything  out 
of  the  common  way  was  thus  regarded : the  twitching  of  a 
nerve,  the  involuntary  movement  of  a limb,  the  twinkling  of 
the  eye,  or  sudden  awaking  out  of  sleep,  were  all  tokens  of 
something  which  required  a council  to  be  held  to  ascertain 
what  they  meant.  They  had  also  different  birds  of  omen,  as 


RELIGION. 


105 


the  UeJdj  a pretty  little  black,  white,  and  yellow  bird,  with 
its  colors  remarkably  distinct ; if  it  sings  on  the  right  hand 
it  is  a favorable  omen,  if  on  the  left  a contrary  one  : if  it 
sings  a full  range  of  its  notes,  however,  it  is  favorable, 
although  on  the  wrong  side. 

In  summing  up  the  subject  of  the  Polynesian  religion, 
the  probable  source  from  which  it  was  derived,  and  the  way 
by  which  it  came,  whether  via  Suez  or  Panama,  much 
may  be  said  for  each.  The  older  way  from  the  east 
has  strong  evidence  in  its  favor,  especially  as  applying  to 
the  black  race  and  its  peculiar  character  of  religion ; but 
still  there  is  much  also  to  be  advanced  in  behalf  of  that 
. from  the  west,  which  is  the  shortest  and  most  direct.  It 
certainly  appears  to  have  been  the  route  by  which  no  small 
portion  of  those  races  which  peopled  the  eastern  sides  of 
America  arrived ; and  it  is  especially  to  be  observed,  that 
the  grand  centre  of  American  civilization  was  seated  on  the 
Isthmus.  It  was  there  the  arts  chiefly  flourished,  the  finest 
monuments  of  antiquity  found,  and  in  the  greatest  abundance. 
The  lofty  monolithic  pillars  with  their  elaborate  and  well- 
executed  sculptures  seem  to  claim  some  affinity  with  the  Punic 
ones  of  Scandinavia,  and  the  more  advanced  civilization  of 
Phoenicia.  This  applies  with  equal  force  to  the  character  of 
their  religion.  Much  of  it  may  have  been  derived  from  the 
western  coast  of  Africa,  as  that  of  the  serpent  and  fetish 
tree;  and  much  also  from  those  earliest  navigators  of  the 
ocean,  as  that  of  the  grove  and  high  places. 

The  word  Teocalli  has  a singular  resemblance,  both  in 
sound  and  signification,  to  that  of  Deocolle ; Teo  or  Tio  seems 
to  run  throughout  Polynesia,  being  Tii  in  the  Sandwich, 
Friendly  and  other  isles.  In  New  Zealand  it  is  found  in 
Tiki,  and  in  Japan  in  Dairi.  That  the  north-eastern  parts 
of  America  were  early  visited  from  Europe,  there  can  be  no 
doubt.  It  must,  therefore,  be  concluded,  though  from  Eastern 
Asia  much  has  been  derived,  that  still  the  two  grand  routes 
alluded  to,  have  the  strongest  evidence  in  their  favor,  the 
different  races  having  thus  arrived  and  brought  their  religion 
with  them. 


106 


RELIGION. 


A brief  allusion  may  be  also  made  to  tbe  probable  age 
when  Polynesia  was  first  peopled.  If  tbe  conjectures  already 
advanced  be  correct,  its  greatest  antiquity  cannot  be  much 
beyond  that  of  the  Phoenicians,  whether  derived  from  the 
east  or  the  west.  That  it  is  not  more  ancient  is  also  proved 
by  its  population  being  so  sparsely  scattered  as  well  as  the 
paucity  of  its  remains  of  former  times. 


A MEMORIAL  IDOL,  AND  PRIEST  INVOKING  HIS  GOD. 


CRYING  FOR  THE  DEAD. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


MYTHOLOGY. 

The  mythology  of  an  isolated  race,  like  that  of  the  Maori, 
is  an  important  aid  in  ascertaining  the  locality  from  whence 
it  originally  sprang ; embodied  in  it,  the  most  ancient  re- 
mains of  its  history  are  to  be  found,  as  well  as  peculiarities 
of  its  religion;  and  it  is  there,  amongst  fables  and  foolish 
tales,  that  some  faint  remains  of  ancient  truth  are  to  be 
discerned. 

In  fact,  mythology  is  the  natural  measure  of  the  unen- 
lightened mind ; it  contains  the  aspirings  of  the  soul  after 
higher  objects,  which  are  beyond  its  reach,  and  its  efforts  to 
realize  the  dim  images  faintly  formed  in  the  mind,  as  the 
man  wandering  in  darkness  strives  to  give  shape  to  the 
objects  indistinctly  seen  to  connect  them  together. 

Of  their  traditions  it  may  be  remarked,  that  the  most 
ancient  are  those  which  are  common  to  other  islands,  as 
they  evidently  belong  to  a period  anterior  to  their  arrival  in 


108 


MYTHOLOGY. 


New  Zealand;  whilst  such  as  are  totally  dissimilar  to  any 
other,  may  be  supposed  to  belong  peculiarly  to  themselves, 
and  thus  mark  the  turn  which  native  thought  has  taken, 
after  it  has  been  cut  off  from  every  other  portion  of  the 
world.  This  clearly  shews  how  the  human  mind,  when  left 
to  its  own  resources,  without  the  means  of  cultivation  and 
enlargement,  becomes  deteriorated,  loses  its  manly  character, 
and  falls  into  childish  frivolity  and  weakness ; whilst  in  the 
same  degree  that  the  mental  powers  are  impaired,  the  fierce 
passions  of  the  savage,  brute  force  and  violence,  increase. 

The  knowledge  which  has  even  now  been  acquired  of 
the  mythology  of  this  singular  race,  is  very  imperfect ; and 
as  the  old  people,  in  whose  breasts  it  is  locked  up,  rapidly 
pass  away,  much  of  it  will  perish  with  them.  The  rising 
generation  is  indifferent  to  the  traditions  of  the  past ; the 
mind  being  now  occupied  with  so  many  fresh  subjects  of 
interest,  which  European  intercourse  is  introducing,  it  can- 
not be  wondered,  that  it  should  be  disinclined  to  burthen 
itself,  with  long  strings  of  names  and  rites,  which  are  pre- 
served in  language  as  dissimilar  to  that  now  spoken,  as 
Spencer  or  Chaucer  is  to  ours ; and  this  also  presents  a 
great  difficulty  in  the  research,  as  it  is  only  the  old  men 
who  can  explain  words  which  have  long  been  obsolete. 

Properly  speaking,  the  natives  had  no  knowledge  of  a 
Supreme  Being.  They  had  a multitude  of  gods,  and  these 
were  said  to  be  the  fathers  or  creators,  each  one  of  some 
department  in  nature*.  Maori  gods  are  so  mixed  up  with  the 
spirits  of  ancestors,  whose  worship  entered  largely  into  their 
religion,  that  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  one  from  the  other. 
In  fact,  their  traditions  of  the  creation  go  back  far  beyond 
even  the  gods  themselves.  The  Maori  mythology  is  ex- 

* Speaking  to  Te  Heuheu,  the  powerful  Chief  of  Taupo,  of  God,  as  being 
the  creator  of  all  things,  he  ridiculed  the  idea,  and  said,  Is  there  one  maker  of 
all  things  amongst  you  Europeans  ? Is  not  one  a carpenter,  another  a black- 
smith, another  a ship-builder,  and  another  a house-builder  ? And  so  it  was  in 
the  beginning  ; one  made  this,  another  that  : Tane  made  trees,  Ru  mountains, 
Tanga-roa  fish,  and  so  forth.  Your  religion  is  of  to-day,  ours  from  remote 
antiquity.  Do  not  think  then  to  destroy  our  ancient  faith  with  your  fresb- 
bdrn  religion. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


109 


tremely  interesting,  and  quite  different  from  what  we  should 
expect  from  a people  sunk  in  barbarism.  Instead  of  en- 
deavouring to  account  for  the  origin  of  the  world,  and  making 
the  creation  of  the  earth  and  heavens  the  beginning,  as  in 
the  Mosaic  account,  or  even  going  beyond  that,  as  St.  John 
does,  “In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God,”  the  Maori  who  composed 
the  tradition  which  embodies  the  thoughts  of  his  race  as  to 
the  origin  of  all  things,  begins  with  that  beyond  which  there 
is  no  going,  commencing  with  nothing,  which  produced 
something,  which  brought  forth  something  more,  and  gene- 
rated a power  of  increasing.  Spirit,  being  more  subtle  than 
matter,  arose  before  it;  and  thought,  being  supposed  to 
be  more  so  than  spirit,  the  commencement  dates  with  its 
birth. 

There  is  a degree  of  mind  perceptible  in  their  traditions 
of  the  creation,  which  marks  a far  more  advanced  state  than 
their  present.  Their  ideas  in  some  respects  are  not  so  puerile, 
as  those  even  of  the  more  civilized  heathen  nations  of  old, 
and  without  the  light  of  inspiration,  could  not  be  expected 
to  be  more  advanced. 

The  first  period  may  be  styled  the  epoch  of  thought — 

Na  te  kune  te  pupuke  From  the  conception  the  increase, 

Na  te  pupuke  te  hihiri  From  the  increase  the  swelling, 

Na  te  hihiri  te  mahara  From  the  swelling  the  thought, 

Na  te  mahara  te  hinengaro  From  the  thought  the  remem- 

brance, 

Na  te  hinengaro  te  manako.  From  the  remembrance  the  con- 
sciousness, the  desire. 

The  second  period  is  that  of  night  or  darkness— 

Ka  hua  te  wananga  The  word  became  fruitful ; 

Ka  noho  i a riko  riko  It  dwelt  with  the  feeble  glimmer- 

ing ; 

Ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  po,  It  brought  forth  night : 

Ko  te  po  nui,  te  po  roa,  The  great  night,  the  long  night, 

Te  po  i tuturi,  te  po  i pepeke,  The  lowest  night,  the  loftiest  night, 

To  po  uriuri,  te  po  tangotango,  The  thick  night,  to  be  felt, 


110 


MYTHOLOGY. 


Te  po  wawa,  te  po  te  kitea,  The  night  to  be  touched,  the 

night  unseen. 

Te  po  te  waia,  The  night  following  on, 

Te  po  i oti  atu  ki  te  mate.  The  night  ending  in  death. 

This,  we  are  told,  is  all  we  have  to  do  with  night ,*  during 
these  periods  there  was  no  light — there  were  no  eyes  to  the 
world.  Oti  atu  koutou  ki  te  Po — e. 

The  third  period  is  that  of  light — 

Na  te  kore  i ai,  From  the  nothing  the  begetting, 

Te  kore  te  wiwia  From  the  nothing  the  increase, 

Te  kore  te  rawea,  From  the  nothing  the  abundance, 

Ko  hoputu,  ko  hauora,  The  power  of  increasing,  the 

living  breath ; 

Ka  noho  i te  atea,  It  dwelt  with  the  empty  space, 

Ka puta ki  waho,  te  rangi  e tu  nei,  It  produced  the  atmosphere  which 

is  above  us. 


The  fourth  period,  the  creation  of  the  moon  and  sun — 


Ko  te  Rangi  e tere  tere  ana  i 
runga  o te  whenua, 

Ka  noho  te  Rangi  nui  e tu  nei, 
ka  noho  i te  ata-tuhi, 

Ka  puta  ki  waho  te  marama, 
Ka  noho  te  Rangi  i tu  nei  ka 
noho  i a te  werowero, 

Ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  Ra, 

Ko  kiritia  ana  ki  runga  hei  pu 
kanohi  mo  te  rangi, 

Ka  tau  te  Rangi, 

Te  ata-tuhi,  te  ata  rapa,  te  ata- 
ka  mahina,  te  ata  i hiku  rangi, 


The  atmosphere  which  floats  above 
the  earth, 

The  great  firmament  above  us, 
the  spread  out  space  dwelt  with 
the  early  dawn, 

Then  the  moon  sprung  forth  ; 

The  atmosphere  above  dwelt  with 
the  glowing  sky, 

Forthwith  was  produced  the  sun, 
They  were  thrown  up  above  as 
the  chief  eyes  of  Heaven  : 

Then  the  Heavens  became  light, 
The  early  dawn,  the  e?jdy  day, 
The  mid-day.  The  blaze  of  day 
from  the  sky.” 


The  fifth  period,  the  creation  of  land — 

Ko  te  Rangi,  e tu  nei,  The  sky  which  floats  above  the 

earth, 

Ka  noho  i Hawaiki,  Dwelt  with  Hawaiki,  * 


* The  islands  of  Hawaiki,  being  then  the  only  land  known,  is  put  for  papa , 
the  earth. 


HYTHOLOGY. 


Ill 


Ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  Taporapora,  And  produced  Taporapora, 

Ko  tauware  nikau,  ko  kukupara  Tauware  nikau  and  Kukupara, 
Ko  wawauatea,  ko  wiwhi  te  Wawauatea  and  Wiwhi  te  rangi 
rangiora,  ora. 

These  are  the  names  of  lands  or  islands,  supposed  to  have 
been  first  created ; Hawaiki,  or  Hawaii,  the  largest  of  the 
Sandwich  group,  is  the  one  they  originally  came  from,  which 
is  regarded  as  the  cradle  of  their  race. 


The  sixth  period  contains  the  formation  of  gods  and  men — 

Ko  Ru,  no  Ru,  ko  Ou  hoko,  Ru  and  from  Ru  Ou  hoko, 

From  Ou  hoko  Ruatupu, 

Rua  tawito,  from  Rua  tawito, 

Rua  kaipo,  from  Rua  kaipo, 


Na  Ouhoko,  ko  Ruatupu, 
Rua  tawito,  na  Rua  tawito 
Rua  kaipo,  na  Rua  kaipo 


Ko  Ngae,  Ngae  nui,  Ngae  roa,  Ngae,  Ngae  nui,  Ngae  roa, 

Ngae  pea,  ngae  tuturi,  ngae  pepeke, 

Pepeke,  ko  Tatiti,  ko  Rua  tapu,  ko  toe, 

Ko  Rauru  ko  Tama  rakei  ora,  ko,  &c. 

This  is  probably  a list  of  ancestors,  tracing  the  descent  of 
the  chief  who  furnished  it,  from  the  god  Ru. 


The  following  is  another 
from  an  old  Nga-ti-rua-nui 

1.  I tipu  i te  Po, 

I kune  te  Po, 

I whewhe  te  Po, 

I akai  te  Po, 

Ho  ake  ki  ao  marama  ; 

2.  Ka  tipu  te  wai, 

Ka  tipu  te  whenua, 

Ka  tupu  te  Atua 
Ka  tupu  tangata, 

Na  te  Atua  waka  tupu  ; 

8.  Ko  tura  kanga, 

Ko  te  hinganga, 


account  of  the  creation,  obtained 
priest — 

1.  Grew  in  Hades,  or  darkness, 
Conceived  in  Hades, 

Increased  the  conception  in 

Hades, 

Rooted  (established)  in  Hades, 
Going  on  until  light  appeared  ; 

2.  Burst  forth  water, 

Burst  forth  the  earth, 

Sprung  forth  God, 

Sprung  forth  man, 

From  God,  or  the  Spirit,  was 
the  causing  to  spring  forth  ; 

3.  The  felling, 

The  falling, 


112 


MYTHOLOGY. 


Ko  takotoranga, 

Ko  tuturitanga, 

Ko  te  pepeke  tanga, 

Ko  te  weraanga, 

Ko  te  hunenga, 

Ko  te  rekanga, 

Ko  te  pia, 

Ko  te  ware, 

Ko  te  hua, 

Ko  waka  ki  puipu, 

Ko  waka  rahirahi, 

Ko  te  wai  waho, 

Ko  te  ao  marama  ; 

Ko  te  Atua ; 

4.  Ko  te  Rangi  e tu  nei. 

Ka  noho  i Papa  tuanuku, 

Ka  puta  Tane  wakarongo, 

Ko  Tu,  Ko  Tangaroa, 

Ko  Ru,  Ko  Ouhoko, 

Ko  Tao.  Ko  te  putanga, 
Ko  Tauira, 

Ko  te  ao  marama  ; 

5.  Ko  te  Kore  rei  teku, 

Kore  te  wawai, 

Kore  te  whiwhia, 

Kore  te  rawhea, 

Ko  te  Kore,  oti  atu  te  Kore ; 

6.  Te  waia  te  Kore, 

Te  Kore  iho, 

Te  Kore  ma-nu, 

Te  Kore  tapu, 

Te  Kore  tauira, 

Ko  te  putanga, 

Ko  tauira  te  ao  marama ; 


The  settling  down, 

The  making  permanent, 

The  bending, 

The  opening, 

The  conceiving, 

The  sweetening, 

The  manna  (sugar), 

The  resin  (thickening), 

The  fruit, 

The  causing  the  conception  to 
grow, 

The  causing  it  to  increase, 

The  principle  of  life  (seed), 
The  clear  light, 

The  Deity  (Spirit) ; 

4.  The  Heaven  which  stands 

above, 

Dwelt  with  the  earth  spread 
out, 

And  forth  came  Tane,  causing 
to  hear, 

Tu,  Tangaroa, 

Ru,  Ouhoko, 

Tao.  Thence  came 
Religion. 

The  world  made  light ; 

5.  The  nothing  clashing,  the  void, 
The  nothing  contending, 

The  nothing  increasing, 

The  nothing  abounding, 

The  nothing ; finished  the  no- 
thing ; 

6.  The  following  after  the  no- 

thing ; 

The  nothingness  ; 

The  nothing  springing  forth  ; 
The  nothing  sacred, 

The  nothing  religious, 

The  proceeding  forth, 

The  form  of  worship,  the 
world  made  light ; 


MYTHOLOGY. 


113 


7.  Kore  te  paheke,  7. 

Kore  te  watu, 

Watu  Turnknmia, 

Watu  Takina, 

Watu  Kaia, 

Watu  Karewa, 

Ka  rewa  ki  tua  maroki ; 

8.  Te  Kore  te  whiwia,  8. 

Te  Kore  te  rawhea, 

Te  Kore  te  oti  atu, 

Oti  atu  te  Kore, 

Te  Ho  ki  te  Kore, 

Te  mana  te  Kore, 

Te  Waia  te  Kore  ; 

9.  Ko  meru  tukua  a Reinga,  9. 
Ko  meru  tau  tukua  a Reinga, 

Wakawaia  anake  ki  te  ao, 

Ki  te  ao  tawito, 

Ka  pa  te  mate  ki  a matou  ; 


The  nothing  giving  way  (slip- 
Ping)> 

The  no  hail, 

Dark- colored  hail, 

Hail  darting  forth, 

Hail  destroying, 

Hail  melting, 

Flowing  beyond  the  dry  places ; 
The  nothing,  increasing, 

The  nothing,  abounding, 

The  nothing,  the  finishing, 

The  finishing,  the  nothing, 

The  going  on  from  the  nothing, 
The  power,  the  nothing, 

The  pursuing  the  nothing  ; 
Meru  the  Releaser  from  Hades, 
Meru  the  Breaker  of  the  bonds 
of  Hades, 

Who  alone  can  cause  the  feet  to 
retrace  the  path  to  the  world 
above, 

The  ancient  world, 

That  death  may  not  cleave  to  us. 


The  Priest  also  added  the  following  pedigree  of  Tun,  the 
first  man  who  came  from  Hawaiki  to  the  west  coast  of  New 
Zealand  : — - 

Ka  noho  Ui  arei  ka  noho  i Taihuatahi, 

Ka  wanau  tona  tamaiti  ko  Ruarangi, 

Ka  noho  i a Rongo  waroa, 

Ka  wanau  tana  tamaiti  ko  Hatangaimua,  muri  iho  ko  Rakau  Maori, 

Ka  noho  i a Reinga  rangi, 

Ka  wanau  tana  tamaiti  ko  Puamua, 

Ka  noho  i a Teina  tapu  ka  wanau  tana  tamaiti  ko  Rongo  tea  tau 
Karihi, 

Ka  noho  i a Rungamea  ka  wanau  tana  tamaiti  ko  Rongo  te  a rima 
maranea, 

Ka  noho  i a Rungatama  ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  Turi. 

As  many  of  the  tribes  trace  their  descent  from  Turi,  these 
generations  of  ancestors  born  before  the  arrival  of  the  Maori 
in  New  Zealand  are^ery  interesting.  i 


114 


MYTHOLOGY. 


The  Atua  o te  po,  the  gods  of  Hades  or  darkness,  be- 
ing in  existence  before  the  heaven  was  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  were  the  first  and  most  ancient,  as  darkness  pre- 
ceded light;  then  followed  the  gods  of  light,  Nga  Atua 
o te  Ra.  Of  the  former  the  chief  was  Hine-nui-te-po,  great 
mother  night.  Rangi  and  Papa,*  or  Heaven  and  earth,  were 
the  grand  parents  of  them  all.  The  general  idea  of  Heaven 
was  that  it  was  a solid  and  opaque  body,  spread  out  upon  the 
earth,  which  was  flat  as  a board ; Papa,  the  earth,  bears  this 
signification.  The  two  parts  thus  joined  together  formed  a 
globe,  the  heaven  being  one  half  of  a sphere,  the  earth  being 
the  other.fi 

There  were  ten  Heavens the  lowest  was  separated  from 

* Heaven  was  also  called  Rangi  nui  e tu  nei,  the  great  sky  which  stands 
above.  The  earth  was  named  Papa  tua  nuku,  the  great  surface  spread  out 
below. 

t The  account  of  the  mundane  egg,  given  in  the  “ Laws  of  Menu,”  closely 
resembles  that  of  the  Maori  : “ In  that  egg  the.  great  power  sat  inactive  a whole 
year,  at  the  close  of  which,  by  his  thought  alone,  he  caused  the  egg  to  divide 
itself,  and  from  the  two  divisions  he  framed  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  in  the 
midst,  the  subtle  ether,  the  eight  regions,  and  the  permanent  receptacle  of 
waters.” — “ Laws  of  Menu”  in  Sir  W.  Jones’  Works,  vol.  iii,  page  66. 
t Tawaki's  Ascent  to  Heaven. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituatahi, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituarua, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituatoru, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituawa, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituarima, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituaono, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituawitu, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituawaru, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituaiwa, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Piki  ake  Tawaki  i te  Rangituarea, 

E rongo  te  Mahaki. 

Pipiri  moko,  pipiri  moko,  raraumoko  raraumoko, 

Rarauki  taha  tu  o te  rangi. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


115 


the  earth,  by  a solid  transparent  substance  of  ice  or  crys- 
tal,* along  the  under  side,  or  that  next  to  the  earth,  the 
sun  and  moon  were  supposed  to  glide.  Above  this  pave- 
ment was  the  grand  reservoir  of  the  rain,  and  beyond 
that  the  abode  of  the  winds  the  next  of  spirits  ; the 
fourth  of  light ; the  highest  and  most  glorious  of  all  was 
the  habitation  of  Rehua.  Another  account  states,  in  the 
first  heaven  was  the  Hau,  or  wind ; in  the  second  Te  Ao, 
the  clouds ; in  the  third  Te  Kikorangi,  the  body  of  heaven ; 
in  the  fourth  Papa,  the  earth ; in  the  fifth  Te  Roto,  the 
reservoir  of  water,  the  grand  lake ; in  the  sixth  Nga  Atua, 
the  gods,  and  the  same  up  to  the  tenth,  inhabited  by  Rehua. 

The  sky,  with  its  solid  pavement,  lying  upon  the  earth, 
rendered  it  fruitless  ; a few  insignificant  shrubs  and  creeping 
plants  only  had  room  to  grow  on  its  surface. 

The  earth’s  skin,  or  covering,  was  the  tutu  ; 

Her  covering  was  the  wehe-wehe  ; 

Her  covering  was  the  bramble  ; 

Her  covering  was  the  nettle. 

Don’t  grieve  that  the  earth  is  overflowed  with  water  ; 

Don’t  lament  for  the  length  of  time. 

The  ocean’s  reign  shall  be  broken  ; 

The  ocean’s  surface  shall  be  rough, 

(with  lands  springing  up  in  it) 

With  mountains  standing  forth, 

Girdling  round  the  sea. 

* The  following  is  a description  of  the  Heavens  given  by  an  old  Chief : — 
He  tua  whenua  te  rangi,  he  kohatu  nga  wetu,  he  kohatu  nui  te  ra,  na  Maui  i ti- 
toko  ake  te  rangi,  ko  enei  enei,  ko  era  kohatu  era,  i piri  atu  lei  tera  oneone. 
He  kiko  rangi  i tera,  he  mangu  iho  ra  no  tua  atu  i te  kiko  rangi  te  ua,  tua  atu 
he  tangata  : kei  tua  mai  o te  kiko  rangi  te  hau.  Nga  taepanga  o te  rangi, 
nga  tatutanga  ki  raro.  The  heaven  is  solid  ground,  the  stars  are  stones,  the 
sun  is  a great  stone.  It  was  Maui  who  propped  up  the  heaven  ; these  stones 
stuck  to  these  on  this  half  of  the  globe,  the  heaven,  those  stones  stuck  to 
those  on  that  half  of  the  globe,  the  earth.  There  is  a firmament  on  that  side, 
a dark  blue  sky,  and  beyond  the  firmament  is  the  region  of  the  rain,  and  above 
that  of  men  (gods)  ; on  this  side  of  the  firmament  is  the  wind,  the  verge  of 
heaven,  the  depths  below  being  its  region. 

f Tawaki  is  said  to  have  danced  with  such  violence  upon  the  pavement  of 
heaven  when  in  a great  rage  as  to  crack  it,  and  so  let  the  water  through*,  which 
fell  on  the  earth  and  caused  the  deluge. 

i 2 


116 


MYTHOLOGY. 


Yes,  round  the  sea. 

Broken  up  shall  you  be  (0  earth). 

Do  not  grieve,  yes  you,  even  you, 

Lest  you  should  grieve  through  love  ; 

Lest  you  should  grieve  for  your  water-covered  surface ; 

Lest  you  should  lament  for  the  time. 

The  offspring  of  Rangi  and  Papa  were  first  Kongo  Matane, 
the  Kumara,  which  came  from  the  face  of  heaven,  being  a 
plant  requiring  heat ; next  came  Haumia,  the  fern  root, 
which  arose  from  the  back  of  Rangi,  intimating  its  hardy 
nature,  being  found  on  the  cold  hills  and  needing  no  sun  to 
make  it  grow  ; Tane  Mahuta,  from  whom  trees  and  birds 
proceeded,  was  the  next ; then  Tangaroa,  the  god  of  the 
sea  and  its  fish ; and  lastly  Tumata  uenga,  who  was  a man. 
Thus,  he  is  placed  amongst  the  earliest  of  created  beings  and. 
numbered  with  the  gods  of  Hades. 

Another  tradition  places  Tiki  also  amongst  the  earliest 
gods,  from  whom  man  was  said  to  have  proceeded,  his  wife’s 
name  was  Marikoriko,  or  twilight.  The  first  woman  was 
not  born,  but  formed  out  of  the  earth  by  the  Arohi  rohi,  or 
quivering  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  echo  ; their  daughter  was 
Kauatata,  approaching  morn.  Tu  te  nga-na  hau,  the  source 
of  evil,  was  likewise  numbered  amongst  them,  probably  he 
was  the  same  as  Tu  mata  uenga ; and  another  was  Tahu, 
the  author  of  good,  Tahu  is  the  name  for  husband,  and  may 
have  a figurative  reference  to  marriage.  Tane  signifies  a 
male  or  man  ; he  ornamented  the  body  of  his  father,  Heaven, 
by  sticking  the  stars  over  it,  as  pearl  shells  are  stuck  over 
the  bodies  of  images,  thence  Heaven  was  called  the  house  of 
Tane.  He  likewise  opened  a fountain  of  living  water,  thence 
named  after  him,  the  life-giving  fount  of  Tane.* 

He  was  the  parent  of  trees  and  birds,  who  owned  him  as 
their  creator.  He  had  six  names,  each  being  emblematical 
of  his  power  ; most  of  those  who  distinguished  themselves  in 
the  Maori  mythology  had  a similar  number,  thus  we  have — 


* He  pawa  nga  wetu  no  te  whare  o Tane  te  waiora  ; na  Tane  i hoaki  kite 
poho  o tona  Matua  o Rangi. 


MYTHOLOGY.  117 

Tane  Tuturi — the  bending;  from  doing  so  when  he  lifted  up 
the  sky. 

Pepeki — the  bowing  ; when  his  feet  were  against  the  sky. 

Uetika — from  his  being  straight  as  a tree. 

Te  Waiora — from  his  giving  the  living  water  which  restored  life 
to  those  who  bathed  in  it. 

Mahuta — probably  because  canoes  were  made  out  of  his  trees. 

Tane  was  also  the  father  of  night  birds,  the  owl  and  the 
bat,  hence  the  proverb,  “ Ko  te  manu  huna  a Tane  ” the 
hidden  bird  of  Tane,  applied  to  a stranger  who  arrives  in 
the  dark,  or  remains  in  the  place  unnoticed.* 

Of  Tiki  little  is  preserved;  his  great  work  was  that  of 
making  man,  which  he  is  said  to  have  done  after  his  own 
image.  One  account  states,  that  he  took  red  clay  and 
kneaded  it  with  his  own  blood,  and  so  formed  the  eyes  and 
limbs,  and  then  gave  the  image  breath.  Another,  that  man 
was  made  of  clay,  and  the  red  ochreous  water  of  swamps, 
and  that  Tiki  bestowed  both  his  own  form  and  name  upon 
him,  calling  him  Tihi-ahua,  or  Tiki's  likeness.  The  most 
prized  ornament  is  an  uncouth  image  of  a man,  formed  of 

* Ka  noho  a Tane,  i a te  Mumuwhango,  ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  Totara  ; ka 
noho  a Tane  i a te  Puwhakahara  ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  Kahikatoa,  te  Ake 
rautangi ; ka  noho  a Tane  i a ta  Ata-tangi  rea,  ka  puta  ki  waho  te  Maire  rau 
nui ; ka  noho  a Tane  i a Parauri,  ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  Tui ; ka  noho  a Tane 
i a Papa,  ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  Kiwi,  ko  te  manu  hunahuna  a Tane ; ka 
noho  a Tane  i a Haerea  wawa,  ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  Weka ; ka  noho  a Tane 
i a Tuwairore,  ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  te  Kahikatea,  ko  te  Rimu,  ko  te  Totara,  ko 
te  Aratau-waiti  o Tane  ko  nga  tamatama  a Tane  mo  Tu  tenga  nahau  ko  te  kiri, 
ko  te  Kahi-katoa,  hei  whare  mo  Kahukura,  i mam  ai  a kahukura. 


From  Tane  and  Mumuwango 

came  the 

Totara 

From  Tane  and  Puwhakahara 

>> 

l Kahikatoa  ; 

\ Ake-rau-tangi  j 

► trees. 

99 

Ata-tangi-rea 

9 9 

Maire-rau-nui  J 

99 

Parauri 

99 

Tui  -j 

i 

99 

Papa 

99 

Kiwi  & night  > 

■ birds. 

99 

Awa  awa 

9 9 

Weka  ) 

1 

9 9 

Tuwairore 

99 

i Kahikatea  j 

( Rimu,  Totara  j 

| trees. 

“ But  the  Totara,  the  chief  of  trees,  is  the  best  for  canoes  ; whilst  the  Ake 
rau  tangi  and  the  Kahikatoa  are  the  most  suitable  for  weapons  of  war  ; and  the 
bark  of  the  Kahikatoa  serves  as  a house  for  Kahukura.” 


118 


MYTHOLOGY. 


green  stone,  and  worn  round  the  neck  as  a Heitiki,  image, 
or  remembrance  of  Tiki.*  The  new-born  infant  is  called 
he  potiki,  or  a gift  of  Tiki  from  the  Po  or  Hades.  And 
the  top-knot  of  a cbief’s  head,  the  most  sacred  part  of  the 
person,  is  called  He  Pu  Tiki.  Some  traditions  say  that 
Tiki  is  a woman,  but  the  general  idea  is  the  contrary. 

Tawiri  matea,  the  father  of  winds ; his  children  are  storms, 
tempests,  hurricanes,  also  frost,  snow,  hail,  and  sleet,  like- 
wise dew,  fogs,  and  mists. 

Tangaroa,  the  father  of  fish,  and  the  great  god  of  the 
ocean ; this  god  in  Tonga,  is  regarded  as  the  creator  of  all 
things  ; he  is  there  called  Tangaloa ; and  in  Tahaiti,  where 
he  is  known  as  Taaroa,  he  is  viewed  in  the  same  light ; this 
is  also  the  case  in  Hawaii,  f or  the  Sandwich  Isles.  Orongo, 
another  of  the  most  ancient  deities  of  Hawaii,  was  worshipped 
by  the  name  of  Orono  ; Tane  and  Tiki  were  also  known  in 
Tahaiti,  the  latter  by  the  name  of  Tii,  so  likewise  was  Pu,  J 
and  Hine  nui  te  po.  The  same  idea  prevailed  there  of  the 
malignant  character  of  the  Atua  Potiki,  or  infant  gods,  who 
were  called  Hotua  Pou  and  supposed  to  delight  in  mischief. 

The  offspring  of  Papa  and  Pangi  are  next  represented 
as  holding  a council,  to  decide  what  was  to  be  done  with 
their  parents,  that  the  earth  might  be  rendered  fruitful  ; 
as  the  tradition  states,  for  a long  long  period,  “ from  the 
first  night  to  the  tenth,  to  the  hundreth,  to  the  thou- 
sandth night/’  all  was  dark,  the  thick  opaque  ice-paved 

* The  word  Tiki  in  Nukuhiva,  or  Tii  in  Hawaiian,  means  an  image. — See 
Buddie's  Lectures.  In  some  places  it  is  also  called  DU.  The  Japanese  spiritual 
sovereign  is  called  Dairi. 

f At  Hawaii  he  is  called  Kanaroa  ; amongst  the  Maori  he  is  the  god  who 
reveals  secrets.  Tangaroa  piri  whare,  which  implies  that  he  is  an  eavesdropper, 
listening  to  what  others  are  saying,  and  making  mischief  of  it.  It  is  not  im- 
probable that  he  was  the  original  god  of  the  Polynesians  ; see  Buddie's  Lectures. 
— The  Hawaian  gods  were  Kane,  Kanaroa,  Ru,  Tu,  Rono,  and  Ku. 

{ Ru  is  also  a Tahaitian  god.  The  same  tradition  of  the  heaven  being 
joined  to  the  earth  is  found  there,  and  that  they  were  only  separated  by  the 
‘ Teva,  an  insignificant  plant,  Draconitum  pollyphylum,  till  their  god  Ruu 
lifted  it  up.’ 

“ Na  Ruu  i to  te  rai,”  Ru  did  elevate,  or  raise  the  heavens. 

See  ‘ ‘ Ellis's  Polynesian  Researches' ' 


MYTHOLOGY. 


119 


heaven  laid  on  the  earth,  and  rendered  her  barren  (it  was 
indeed  the  eartlFs  glacial  period).  In  vain  did  she  seek  for 
offspring  in  the  likeness  of  the  night,  or  of  the  day.  Then 
they  considered  what  must  be  done  for  Rangi  and  Papa. 
Shall  we  slay  them,  or  shall  we  separate  them  ? Tumata- 
uenga  said,  yes,  let  ns  kill  them.  Tane  Mahuta  replied, 
no,  by  no  means,  rather  let  us  separate  them ; let  one  be 
placed  above  and  the  other  remain  below ; let  one  be  like 
a stranger  far  removed  from  us ; the  other  be  near  as  a 
mother  to  us.  All  agreed  to  this  counsel ; one  only  was 
strongly  opposed  to  their  separation ; five  decided  that  they 
should  be  parted;  one  only  loved  them.  These  are  the 
words  : — 


Te  po,  te  po, 

Te  ao,  te  ao, 

Te  kimihanga,  te  hahaunga, 

I te  kore,  i te  kore, 

Ko  ta  ratou  rapunga, 
Whakaaro  hoki  mo  o ratou 
matua, 

Kia  tupu  ai  te  tangata 
Na  ko  enei  Kupu, 

Ko  te  nuinga,  ko  te  roanga, 
Ko  te  nuinga  ake  o a ratou 
whakaaro, 

Patu  i o ratou  matua, 

Kia  ora  ai  te  tangata, 

Koia  tenei  a ratou  tikanga, 


The-- night,  the  night, 

The  day,  the  day, 

The  seeking,  the  adzing  out, 
From  the  nothing,  the  nothing. 
Their  seeking  thought 
Also  for  their  mother. 

That  man  might  arise, 

Behold  this  is  the  word, 

The  largeness,  the  length, 

The  height  of  their  thought, 

To  kill  their  mother, 

That  man  might  live  : 

This  was  their  counsel. 


“ Tutenganahau  cruelly  severed  the  sinews  which  united 
the  two.  The  first  then  laid  hold  of  her,  but  did  not  suc- 
ceed ; the  second  laid  hold,  but  with  no  more  success ; the 
third  did  the  same ; the  fourth,  the  fifth,  and  he  alone  was 
able.  Alas  for  Rangi  and  Papa ; alas  the  power  of  Tane 
Mahuta*  for  him  was  reserved  the  propping  up  : down  went 
his  head  below,  up  went  his  heels  above  ; up  entirely  went 

* Tane  Mahuta  is  represented  as  a tree  with  its  head  downward  and  roots 
upward  ; and  thus  trees  were  supposed  formerly  to  grow,  because  he  laid  down 
on  his  back  and  thrust  up  the  heaven  with  his  feet. 


120 


MYTHOLOGY. 


Kangi  ; down  entirely  went  Papa.  By  him  were  they 
divided : the  night  was  made  distinct ; the  day  also  was 
made  distinct/’ 

“ The  winds  blew  between  earth  and  heaven  : the  cold 
winds  whistled  over  her  surface,  they  placed  their  mouths 
to  that  of  Tane  Mahuta,  they  shook  his  branches  and  up- 
rooted him  ; they  waged  war  with  Tangaroa,  the  sea,  and 
caused  great  waves  on  his  surface,  still  Tane  completed  his 
work  by  taking  his  lofty  trees  and  propping  up  the  heaven/’* 

By  Tane  was  the  heaven  propped  up ; entirely  separated 
were  heaven  and  earth ; was  it  a vain  separation  ? No, 
indeed.  Now  for  the  first  time  were  seen  the  many  beings 
concealed  in  the  womb  of  heaven  and  earth.  Yes  truly  was 
Tane  the  author 

Of  the  great  day, 

Of  the  long  day, 

Of  the  clear  sky, 

Of  the  day  driving  away  night, 

Of  the  day  making  all  things  distinct, 

Of  the  day  making  everything  bright, 

Of  the  day  driving  away  gloom, 

Of  the  hot  sultry  day, 

Of  the  day  shrouded  in  darkness. 

Named  was  it  by  whom  ? by  Waka-maru-te-ati-nguku. 

Then  appeared  the  lightning, 

The  rain,  the  clear  sky  procured  by  Tane, 

Who  propped  up  the  heaven, 

The  great  heaven  above  ; 

Now  was  the  world  made  light. 


* Ko  te  whanau  Takoto  a Rangi 
Ko  Tane  Tuturi,  ko  Tane  Pepeke 
Ko  Tane  Uetika,  ko  Tane  Ueka 
Ko  Tane  te  wai-ora,  ko  Tane  nui 
a Rangi,  nana  i titoko  te  Rangi  i 
runganei, 

Tu  ke  ana  a Rangi-puna 
Tu  ke  ana  a Papa,  ka  tangi  te 
Hau  matao  i raro  ra,  he  ao  marama, 


The  offspring  of  Rangi,  which  laid  hid 
in  darkness,  were  Tane  Tuturi,  &c., 
by  whom  the  heaven  was  propped  up 
above, 


Stood  apart  the  watery  heaven, 
Stood  apart  the  earth, 

The  cold  air  whistled  beneath, 
The  sky  was  made  bright. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


121 


From  Tawhirimatea  arose  the  thought  to  fight  with  his 
brethren  for  separating  their  parents,  because  he  did  not 
consent  to  their  being  parted  from  their  children,  and  that 
the  earth  only  should  be  left  as  a parent  for  them.  This  also 
was  the  thought  of  Tawhirimatea,  the  wind,  lest  good  should 
increase,  to  follow  his  parent  and  to  cleave  to  the  pavement  of 
the  great  sky.  When  he  arrived  there  great  was  their  love 
for  each  other ; they  consulted  together  and  agreed  to  send 
some  of  the  family  of  Tawhirimatea  to  the  west,  some  to  the 
south,  some  to  the  east,  and  some  to  the  north,  those  also 
were  their  names.  Then  went  forth  the  storm,  the  tempest, 
the  hurricane,  the  freezing  wind,  the  burning  wind,  the 
sleety  wind,  the  rainy  wind,  the  powerful  wind,  and  the 
strongest  of  all,  Tawhirimatea  himself.  When  he  went 
forth,  0 wonderful ! the  rainbow  arose  and  placed  his  mouth 
close  to  Tane  Mahuta,  and  continued  assaulting  him,  his 
trunk  was  snapt  in  two  ; his  branches  broken  off  were 
strewed  along  the  ground  food  for  the  grub,  the  worm,  and 
the  beetle. 

When  he  assaulted  the  water,  Tupari  maewa,  Uru-tira, 
and  Tangaroa  fled  to  the  sea ; but  before  that  his  offspring, 
Punga,  and  Punga' s two  sons,  Ikatere  and  Tu-te-wehi-wehi, 
whose  other  name  is  Tu-te-wanawana,  with  their  followers  dis- 
agreed ; let  us  fly  inward  said  some,  let  us  fly  to  the  water 
said  others  : some  agreed  to  one  thing,  some  to  another ; 
one  tribe  was  on  one  side,  another  on  the  other,  that  of  Tu- 
te-manawa  remained  on  the  land,  that  of  Punga  went  to  the 
water. 

These  divisions  were  caused  by  Tawhirimatea.  Hence 
this  jeering  song— 

“ Let  us  go  inland,  let  us  go  into  the  water.” 

Ikatere,  a fish,  said  to  Tu-te-wanawana,  a lizard,  let  us 
go  into  the  water  ; but  Tu'  said  better  inland.  Ika'  replied, 
you  may  go  inland  and  be  burnt  when  the  fern  is  set  fire  to ; 
and  Tu'  rejoined  to  Ika’,  go  you  to  the  water  that  you  may 
be  caught  and  hung  up  on  the  stage  to  dry.  Tu-te-wehi- 
wehi  was  now  first  assumed  by  Tu-te-wanawana  as  his 


122 


MYTHOLOGY. 


second  name  ; this  is  all ; — henceforth  they  were  separated, 
dispersed,  some  in  the  water,  some  inland.  Thence  arose 
a constant  quarrel  between  Tangaroa  and  Tane,  on  ac- 
count of  the  children  of  Tangaroa  going  inland,  i.e.,  the 
lizards,  the  offspring  of  the  god  of  fish.  The  children  of 
Tangaroa  were  killed  by  Tane,  that  is  by  his  canoes,  his 
nets,  his  hooks,  and  barbs ; the  children  of  Tane  were 
consumed  by  Tangaroa,  his  canoes  were  swallowed  up  by 
the  waves ; he  also  overwhelmed  the  lands,  the  trees,  and 
houses,  with  his  floods ; the  water  likewise  constantly  con- 
sumed the  land,  that  is  Papa-tua-nuku,  that  the  mighty  trees 
might  be  washed  out  to  sea  for  him,  that  he  might  gain  all 
the  lands  of  Tane ; hence  the  spell — 


Fighting  on  the  land, 
Fighting  on  the  water, 
Fighting  with  Tane, 
Fighting  with  Tangaroa, 
Power  on  land, 

Power  on  the  water, 
Power  with  Tane, 

Power  with  Tangaroa. 


Tapatua  koi  uta, 
Tapatua  koi  tai, 
Tapatua  Tane, 
Tapatua  Tangaroa, 
He  kaha  koi  uta, 
He  kaha  koi  tai, 

He  kaha  Tane, 

He  kaha  Tangaroa. 


When  Tawhirimatea  turned  to  fight  with  Rongomatane 
and  Haumia-tike-tike,  Papa  took  pity  and  would  not  let 
them  be  taken,  she  hid  them  in  her  bosom,  so  Tawhirimatea 
sought  for  them  in  vain.  Papa  concealed  her  children. 

Then  first  did  Tawhirimatea  try  his  strength  with  Tu- 
mata-uenga ; each  gave  forth  his  anger,  his  defiance ; he 
was  the  only  one  of  those  who  counselled  the  killing  of  their 
parents,  who  was  bold  enough  and  strong  enough  to  fight ; 
his  brethren  were  entirely  overcome  by  TawhirP  and  his  chil- 
dren ; Tane  was  quite  broken  down  ; put  to  flight  entirely 
was  Tangaroa,  some  fleeing  inland  and  some  to  the  sea. 
Rongo  and  Haumia-tike-tike  fled  to  the  earth,  but  Tu-mata- 
uenga,  or  man,  stood  firm  on  the  breast  of  his  mother  earth. 
Behold,  Heaven  and  TawhirP  were  very  angry  : let  us  wait, 
said  they,  till  the  children  of  Taranga  and  Makea-tu-tara  are 
born,  Maui-taha,  Maui-roto,  Maui-pae,  Maui-waho,  and  Maui- 
tiki-tiki  o Tarenga,  who  tried  to  deceive  Hine-nui-te-po,  and 


MYTHOLOGY. 


123 


thus  brought  death  on  man  ; had  he  not  done  so  there 
would  have  been  no  death,  and  man  would  have  lived  for 
ever ; but  he  caused  death  by  his  sin  to  be  for  ever  the 
portion  of  the  men  of  this  world,  to  cleave  to  them  above 
and  below. 

Then  Tu*  sought  some  cause  of  quarrel  that  he  might 
kill  his  brethren,  and  that  was  their  feebleness  in  seeking 
revenge  of  Tawhiri  for  their  parents.  He  first  turned 
against  Tane  Mahuta,  because,  though  great  was  his  family, 
he  did  not  help  him ; he  also  sought  the  tribe  of  Tangaroa, 
and  found  how  scattered  the  members  of  it  were ; then  he 
turned  against  Bongo  and  Haumia ; they  were  not  hid  from 
him,  he  found  them  out  by  their  hair,  that  is  their  leaves, 
which  were  on  the  surface ; he  adzed  out  a spade,  and 
plaited  a basket,  he  found  them  out,  the  soil  being  heaped 
up  over  them,  and  dried  by  the  sun,  therefore  Tu*  devoured 
them  both.  When  he  had  thus  subdued  all  his  brethren, 
then  he  added  to  his  names  the  following,  to  equal  those  of 
his  relatives — 


Tu-mata-uenga, 

Tu-ka  riri, 

Tu-ka  nguha, 

Tu-kai  taua, 
Tu-whakaheke  tangata 
Tu-mata  waiti, 


Tu — with  the  dreadful  countenance, 
Tu — the  angry, 

Tu — the  fiery, 

Tu — the  lover  of  war, 

Tu — the  man  consumer, 

Tu — with  the  piercing  eye. 


Four  of  his  brethren  were  consumed  by  him ; one  only 
escaped  that  fate.  He  devoured  the  kumara,  the  fern  root, 
fish,  birds  and  fruit,  but  the  wind  he  could  not ; therefore 
his  quarrel  with  him  still  remains,  and  his  anger  was  met 
by  that  of  his  brother  the  wind.  He  took  off  the  tapu  from 
his  four  relatives,  therefore  suiting  his  spells  for  each,  one 
for  the  trees,  another  for  the  fish,  one  for  the  kumara,  another 
for  the  fern  root,  that  he  might  compel  them  all  to  become 
his  food;  he  had  spells  to  lay  the  wind  and  calm  the  sky, 
and  also  for  the  earth,  that  it  might  be  subject  to  his 
will.  Thus  man  has  many  spells  to  overcome  his  brethren ; 
some  to  appease,  some  for  spirits,  some  for  this  and  some 


124 


MYTHOLOGY. 


for  that.  Thus,  some  part  of  the  earth  was  destroyed  when- 
ever TV  or  the  wind  exerted  its  power.  The  names  of  those 
ancestors  by  whom  the  earth  was  injured,  were  these : Ua- 
nui,  heavy  rain ; Ua-roa,  long  rain  ; Ua-whatu,  hail  rain ; 
Ua-nganga,  sleet  rain,  dew,  heavy  dew,  and  chilly  dew. 
The  grand  surface  of  the  earth  was  covered  with  water,  a 
small  part  only  being  dry  land. 

After  that,  light  shone  clearly  on  the  earth;  then  first 
men  began  to  multiply ; the  offspring  of  Tumata-uenga 
and  his  brethren  were  increased  by  the  night  and  by  the 
day,  by  the  nothing,  and  by  the  seeking,  by  Runuku  and  his 
children  up  to  Ngae-nui  and  his  family,  to  Whiro-te-tupua 
and  his  sons,  to  Tiki  tawhito  Ariki,  Tiki  the  ancient  lord, 
and  his  sons.  The  children  of  Tumata-uenga  also  very 
greatly  increased  until  the  birth  of  Maui. 

Heaven  still  continues  to  dwell  apart  from  his  partner  the 
earth,  but  she  still  continues  to  weep  for  her  husband,  as  the 
mist  upon  the  mountains  rolls  up  to  heaven,  and  the  tears  of 
heaven  constantly  fall  on  the  earth  in  the  form  of  dew. 

The  next  person  who  appears  on  the  stage  is  Maui : he 
may  be  called  the  grand  hero  of  the  Hew  Zealand  mythology, 
and  it  is  upon  his  history  the  natives  delight  to  dwell.  A 
person  called  Tara-hunga  is  said  to  have  been  the  father  of 
the  Maui  family ; another  tradition  makes  Makea-tu-tara 
his  father  and  Taranga  his  mother;  his  was  a premature 
birth,  so  his  mother  cut  off  her  tikitiki,  long  tresses,  and 
wrapping  him  in  them  cast  him  into  the  sea ; there  the  winds, 
storms  and  wave-uplifting  gales  nursed  him,  and  at  last  threw 
him  up  on  the  shore,  where  he  was  found  by  his  great  an- 
cestor Tama-nui-ki-te-rangi,  who  carried  him  to  his  house  and 
suspended  him  from  the  roof,  that  the  smoke  and  warm  air 
might  restore  him  ; thus  he  grew  up  and  his  mother  called 
him  Maui-tiki-tiki-a  Taranga,  or  Maui  formed  in  the  top-knot 
of  Taranga;  his  father  Makea-tu-tara  at  his  baptism  omitted 
some  of  the  Karakias,  and  this  caused  Maui  to  be  subject  to 
death  : he  had  four  brothers,  but  he  the  last,  or  youngest, 
is  the  most  important  character : his  elder  brethren  were 
surnamed  Ware- ware,  which  signifies  that  they  were  forget- 


MYTHOLOGY. 


125 


ful  or  absent.  Maui  Potiki,  the  youngest,  has  six  names, 
which  are  expressive  of  his  power : thus  he  is  called  Nukurau 
from  the  tricks  he  played  on  his  brethren,  Atamai  from  his 
liberality,  Toa  from  his  strength,  Mohio  from  his  knowledge, 
and  Tiki-tiki-a  Taranga,  which  signifies  that  he  possessed 
the  tiki}  top-knot,  or  power  of  his  mother. 

His  brethren,  however,  professed  to  despise  and  underrate 
their  younger  brother,  taking  every  advantage  of  him ; 
when  they  went  out  fishing,  they  would  give  him  what  they 
caught  to  cook,  and  then  eat  up  all  themselves,  only  leaving 
him  the  scales  for  his  portion.  He  likewise  appears  to  have 
returned  evil  for  evil,  sometimes  refusing  to  join  in  their 
fishing  until  they  had  finished  ; he  would  then  throw  his 
hook  into  the  water,  and  at  one  pull  catch  more  fish  than 
they  had  all  taken  together.  Some  traditions  also  allude  to 
his  playing  tricks  on  his  facia  and  waea — his  grandmother 
and  mother.  He  is  also  said  to  have  been  guilty  of  great 
impiety  in  taking  the  jaw-bone  of  his  grandfather  Muri 
Rangawhenua,  and  making  a fish-hook  of  it,  which  he  kept 
concealed  under  his  mat.  One  of  Maui^s  works  was  tying 
the  sun  and  moon  together,  so  that  having  run  their  daily 
courses,  they  should  return  to  their  starting  place.  Another 
was  his  catching  the  sun  with  a snare  as  he  made  his  appear- 
ance in  the  morning  over  the  edge  of  the  world,  and  then 
unmercifully  beating  him  to  render  him  lame,  so  that  he 
could  not  run  but  only  proceed  slowly,  thus  increasing  the 
length  of  the  day ; it  was  then  that  he  found  out  his  name  to 
be  Tama-nui-te-ra,  the  great  man  day.  Another  work  of 
this  Maori  Hercules  was  killing  Tunarua,  a great  monster, 
who  lived  in  the  water,  cutting  off  his  head  and  casting  it 
into  the  sea,  where  it  became  a koiro,  or  conger  eel ; throw- 
ing the  tail  into  the  fresh  water,  where  it  turned  into  the 
tuna , or  eel ; another  part  thrown  on  the  ground,  caused 
the  kareao  or  supple-jack  to  spring  up ; the  blood  was 
absorbed  by  the  rimu}  totara , toatoa,  and  other  trees  having 
red  wood,  which  accounts  for  their  color. 

Afterwards  Maui  accompanied  his  brother  Ware-ware  to 
the  woods  to  get  makaka , a strong  flexible  climbing  plant, 


126 


MYTHOLOGY. 


used  for  the  manufacture  of  eel  baskets.  Ware-ware  made 
an  opening  at  the  end  for  the  fish  to  enter  by,  but  as  he  used 
no  precaution  to  hinder  them  from  going  out  again,  they 
only  eat  the  bait  and  went  away,  but  Maui  Mohio  made  a tohi, 
or  door,  to  the  entrance  of  his  basket,  thus  hindering  the 
fish  from  escaping ; so  that  whilst  his  elder  brother  had  no 
fish,  his  basket  was  filled.  On  their  return  home  Maui  Mohio 
privately  removed  his  tohi , lest  his  contrivance  should  be 
known ; so  when  his  disappointed  brothers  saw  his  success, 
they  inquired  the  cause,  and  examining  his  basket,  found 
to  their  surprise  that  it  was  just  the  same  as  their  own. 
Afterwards  the  elder  brothers  made  some  spears  for  birds ; 
all  their  points  were  smooth;  but  Maui  added  a barb  to  his; 
when  they  went  to  the  woods  to  spear  birds,  they  wounded, 
but  could  not  secure  them,  as  they  slipped  off  the  smooth 
point : Maui  secured  all  his,  as  the  barb  of  his  spear  held 
them  firm ; but  when  they  returned  home,  he  privately 
removed  it,  and  put  on  the  smooth  point  again,  that  they 
might  not  discover  his  invention. 

Afterwards  the  elder  brothers  made  some  fish-hooks ; Maui 
did  the  same,  but  his  were  all  barbed,  whilst  theirs  were 
smooth  ; they  went  to  sea ; his  brothers  caught  fish,  but  they 
escaped,  Maui  secured  all  his ; his  brothers  called  out  to  him, 
let  us  see  your  hooks ; he  held  up  one  that  was  unbarbed 
like  their  own ; they  returned  home,  but  without  fish  ; Maui 
the  cunning  alone  had  any.  His  brethren  were  very  angry, 
and  turned  him  out  of  their  canoe;  they  told  him  and  Irawaru, 
his  brother-in-law,  to  go  to  sea  in  a canoe  by  themselves. 
Maui  gave  the  baits  to  him  to  put  on  the  hooks,  but,  like 
a greedy  dog,  he  eat  them  all  up  ; this  made  him  very 
angry,  and  when  they  landed  he  bid  his  brother-in-law 
go  on  before  and  lie  down,  as  a skid  ;*  Irawaru  did  so, 
and  Maui  dragged  the  canoe  over  his  back,  and,  behold  it 
was  broken ; he  pulled  it  out  to  lengthen  it,  and  form  a tail, 

* The  custom  of  putting  captives  to  death  by  using  them  as  skids,  and 
dragging  heavy  canoes  over  their  prostrate  bodies,  is  still  common  in  some  of 
the  Polynesian  isles,  and  seems  from  this  allusion  to  have  been  once  practised 
in  New  Zealand. — (See  Cruise  of  the  Fawn.) 


MYTHOLOGY. 


127 


he  was  turned  into  a dog  ;*  Mani  left  him,  and  returned 
to  his  home ; his  sister  asked  him,  where  is  your  brother- 
in-law?  Maui  replied,  he  is  there  taking  care  of  our  fish; 
she  went  and  called  Irawaru,  Irawaru,  his  second  name  was 
Kooa;  then  returned,  and  said  he  is  not  there.  He  in- 
quired, did  you  go  as  far  as  the  canoe  ? she  said,  yes  ; 
Maui  then  bid  her  go  back  and  cry  moi  moi,  the  usual  way 
of  calling  a dog ; the  woman  went,  and  when  she  arrived 
at  the  canoe,  cried  moi  moi,  and  behold  Irawaru  ran  up  to 
her ; the  tail  was  turned  into  the  head,  and  the  head  into 
the  tail ; when  she  came  to  Maui  she  said,  why  have  you 
acted  in  this  way  to  your  brother-in-law,  to  turn  him  into  a 
dog  ? he  replied,  because  he  eat  our  baits  like  one.  Thus 
Irawaru  became  the  father  of  dogs,  which,  being  descended 
from  a god,  were  considered  sacred. 

Soon  after  this,  he  finished  making  his  fish-hook,  which  is 
called  “ TuwhawhaMa  te  rangi.”-\  The  face  of  it  is  named 
Muri  ranga  whenua.  His  brethren  again  went  to  the  sea 
in  their  canoe,  which  is  called  the  Riu  o Mahid.  Maui  ac- 
companied them,  remembering  his  former  conduct,  they 
would  not  take  him,  but  went  to  sea  alone,  although  he 
continually  entreated  to  go.  No,  no  ; you  are  too  full  of 
craft ; stay  behind.  So  they  left  him.  Some  time  after- 


* In  another  tradition,  the  following  is  given  as  the  incantation  used  by  Maui 
to  turn  Irawaru  into  a dog  — 


E hau  koe-i  tai, 

E hau  koe-i  tai, 

Kai  to  atua  nui, 

Kai  to  atua  roa ; 

Ko  i a witi, 

Ko  i a pana, 

Ko  i a taratara, 

Waka  hokia,  waka  hokia  mai, 
Ekoe  ki  taku  moi  moi ; 
Tautika,  tautonu  hoki ; 

Ki  to  matua  he  mihi, 

He  aroha,  moi  a rua. 


Bark  you  from  the  sea, 

Bark  you  from  the  sea, 

Consume  your  great  divinity, 

Consume  your  long-enduring  divinity  ; 
Y ou  pass  over, 

You  be  thrust  out, 

Y ou  be  rough  with  hair,  [ding, 

Y oube  caused  to  go  and  return  at  the  bid- 
My  dog ; bark  loud,  bark  long  ; 

To  your  master  fawn, 

Bestow  your  love, 

This  is  your  law,  my  dog. 


t According  to  another  tradition,  Aurarotuia  was  the  name  of  the  canoe, 
Pikiawhea  the  hook,  Awhenga  the  face  of  it,  and  Ko  ake,  a man,  the  name  of 
the  bait.  Some  say,  that  he  cut  off  a piece  of  his  ear  for  a bait. 


128 


MYTHOLOGY. 


wards  he  took  the  form  of  a Piwakawaka,  the  fan-tailed 
fly-catcher,  a very  lively  restless  little  bird,  and  flying 
straight  to  the  canoe  perched  on  the  prow ; but  as  he  be- 
gan twirling  about,  his  brothers  immediately  recognized 
him;  he  then  dropped  his  feathers  one  by  one,  and  again 
resuming  his  proper  form  sat  down  in  the  canoe.  His 
brothers  said,  don’t  let  us  give  him  a bait  for  his  hook ; 
Maui  looked  about  and  saw  the  root  end  of  a flax  leaf  lying 
near  him ; he  cut  it  off  as  a bait  for  his  hook,  made  from 
the  jawbone  of  his  grandfather,  which  he  pulled  from  be- 
neath his  mat ; he  gave  his  nose  a blow,  and  with  the  blood 
which  came  from  it,  saturated  the  lump  of  flax,  which  he  tied 
on  his  hooki*  and  cast  into  the  sea,  paying  out  the  line  as 
he  uttered  this  spell — 


Angi  angi  ki  te  wakarua, 
Angi  angi  ki  te  mawaki ; 
Taku  aho  ka  tangi  wiwi  nei ; 
Taku  aho  ka  tangi  wawa ; 
Taku  aho  kai  iria  ka  mate, 
Tu  ana  he  wata  mano  wai. 
Manowa  mai  hoki, 

Te  watu  wiwia, 

Te  watu  rawea, 

Te  watu  ko  ronga  ta, 

Au  ni  ka  wai  atu 
Ki  moana,  ka  wainga 
Waka  nene  a Maui 
Waka  nene  a-ka-tau, 


Blow  gently  from  the  wakarua, 
Blow  gently  from  the  mawaki ; 
My  line  let  it  pull  straight ; 

My  line  let  it  pull  strong ; 

My  line,  it  is  pulled, 

It  has  caught, 

It  has  come. 

The  land  is  gained, 

The  land  is  in  the  hand, 

The  land  long  waited  for, 

The  boasting  of  Maui, 

His  great  land, 

For  which  he  went  to  sea, 

His  boasting,  it  is  caught, 


He  Hirihiringa  mo  te  hutinga 
a te  ao, 


A spell  for  the  drawing  up  of  the 
world. 


He  let  out  all  his  line,  and  then  there  was  a bite ; the 
hook  caught  something,  which  pulled  very  hard,  the  canoe 
heeled  over,  and  was  on  the  point  of  capsizing ; his  bro- 


* Te  pirita  o te  rangi  te  waka,  tu-whawhakia  o te  rangi,  te  mata  o te 
matau,  nga  kawae  o Muriranga-whenua : i tona  haeretanga  i te  moana,  kai 
ponu  tona  hoa  kua  motokia-tona  ihu  muri  iho  ka  puta  mai  he  toto  ka  mea  atu 
nga  hoa  o Maui  kia  tukua  te  ika,  ka  mea  atu  kei  hea  hoki  ta  Maui  hoe  ai  i te 
wai  ? 


MYTHOLOGY. 


129 


tliers  called  out,  Maui  let  go  ; lie  replied,*  wliat  did  I 
come  for  but  to  catcb  fish  ? I won*t  let  go  ; so  lie  con- 
tinued pulling  in  bis  bne,  and  a*gain  tbe  canoe  beeled  over ; 
his  brothers  impatiently  repeated  the  command,  Maui  let 
go,  we  shall  be  drowned  ; but  he  persisted  in  pulling,  and 
at  last  the  earth  came  up.  The  hook  caught  the  Maihi,  or 
facing  board  of  Hine-nui-te-po*s  house,  f and  drew  it  up 
with  the  land  : this  was  Ranga  whenua,  the  fish  of  Maui. 
He  boastingly  asked  his  brothers  the  name  of  his  fish  : they 
could  not  tell  ; again  and  again  did  he  ask  them,  they 
were  dumb  with  amazement ; he  told  them  it  was  Haha 
whenua,  that  is,  the  searching  for  land.  The  moment  the 
land  came  up  their  canoe  grounded,  and  the  hills  appeared.  J 
The  canoe,  it  is  said,  still  remains  on  the  top  of  Hikurangi, 
a lofty  mountain  at  Waiapu,  near  the  East  Cape ; some  say 
it  is  further  south,  at  Ahuriri.  The  salt  water  eye  of  the 
fish  is  Wanganui-a-te-ra,  Port  Nicholson  • the  fresh  water 
eye  is  Wairarapa;  the  upper  jaw  Rongo  rongo,  the  north 
head  of  Port  Nicholson  ; the  lower  jaw  Te  Rimurapa,  the 
south  head  of  the  same  ; the  head  of  this  fish  of  Maui  lies 
at  Turakirae,  a mountain  on  the  coast  near  Wai-ra-rapa;  the 
tail  is  the  spirits*  flying  place,  Cape  Maria  van  Dieman ; the 
belly  is  Taupo  and  Tongariro,  and  the  back  the  east  coast. 

One  tradition  states,  that  Maufis  brothers,  immediately 
they  saw  the  fish,  took  their  tuatini,  an  instrument  bordered 
with  a row  of  shark’s  teeth,  the  ancient  Maori  knife,  and 
began  crimping  it,  which  accounts  for  the  hills  and  valleys 

* Ka  mau  ta  Maui  ki  tona  ringa  ringa  e lcore  e taia  te  ruru.  What  Maui 
has  got  in  his  hand  he  cannot  throw  away ; which  has  passed  into  a proverb. 

f The  Nga-puhi  tradition  states  that  it  was  Tonganui’s  house,  and  that  Maui 
used  the  following  spell  to  bring  it  up  : — 

What  dost  thou  intend,  Tonganui, 

That  thou  art  sullenly  biting  below  there  ? 

The  power  of  Rangiwhenua’s  jawbone  is  seen  on  thee; 

Thou  art  coming  ; thou  art  conquered  ; 

Thou  art  coming  ; appear,  appear, 

Shake  thyself,  grandson  of  Tangaroa  the  little. 

t Taupiri,  an  isolated  mountain,  is  said  by  some  to  have  been  the  first  land 
which  was  seen. 

K 


130 


MYTHOLOGY. 


with  all  the  irregularities  of  the  islands’  surface.  A similar 
tradition  prevails  in  the  Tonga  isles ; but  there  Tangaloa 
is  the  fisherman ; with  some  variations,  this  myth  is  known 
from  one  end  of  the  island  to  the  other.  It  appears  only  to 
apply  to  the  north  island,  which  indeed  resembles  a fish  in 
shape ; and  the  perfect  knowledge  which  the  natives  had  of 
its  form,  is  an  evident  proof  that  they  had  formerly  circum- 
navigated it,  and,  in  fact,  once  lived  more  peaceably  and  had 
more  friendly  intercourse  with  each  other  than  in  later  times. 
It  is  not  improbable  that  the  name  Maui  is  nothing  more  than 
a title  given  to  the  person  who  first  sighted  land.  Ma-u-i 
literally  signifies  as  much.  Maui  also  means  to  bewitch  or 
enchant ; in  both  of  which  arts  he  was  a great  adept.* 

The  next  great  work  of  Maui  was  his  contention  with 
Mauika.  Some  traditions  make  him  to  be  the  grandfather 
Maui ; others  deny  it ; he  appears  to  have  been  a kind  of 
Maori  Pluto,  his  body  filled  with  fire;  the  name  Mauika 
seems  to  imply  that  he  was  a member  of  the  Maui  family 
and  distinguished  by  his  being  fire  ; at  any  rate,  it  is  generally 
supposed  that  it  first  proceeded  from  him.  Some  traditions 
represent  Mauika  as  a woman. 

Behold  Mauika  had  fire  in  his  fingers  and  toes;  when 
Maui  knew  this  he  went  to  kill  him  by  his  cunning : on  his 
ancestor  enquiring  the  object  of  his  visit,  Maui  replied,  to 
obtain  fire,  he  immediately  gave  him  one  of  his  fingers, 
the  koiti,  or  little  one.  Maui  left  him,  and  went  straight  to 
the  water  and  extinguished  it.  Then  he  returned  again  and 
said  his  fire  had  gone  out  : Mauika  inquired,  how  is  it  that 
the  fire  is  extinguished  ; he  replied,  he  had  fallen  into  the 
water ; he  then  cut  off  the  manaiva , or  ring  finger.fi  Maui 
went,  and  extinguished  it  also,  and  then  wetted  his  hand, 
that  Mauika  might  think  what  he  said  was  true ; again  he 

* Maui  is  the  name  of  a game  closely  resembling  “cats  cradles,”  which 
represents  the  different  scenes  of  the  Maori  creation,  such  as  Hine-nui-te-po, 
Maui’s  fish,  &c. 

f This  tradition  seems  to  allude  to  the  custom  of  cutting  off  fingers,  practised 
in  most  of  the  Polynesian  isles  as  a token  of  grief  for  the  dead,  which  is  a proof 
of  their  origin,  as  the  practice  is  thus  preserved  in  a legend  of  ancient  times, 
although  the  custom  no  longer  exists  amongst  the  Maori. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


131 


presented  himself  before  him  for  more  fire ; the  reason  of 
his  continually  repeating  the  request  was  that  all  the  fire  in 
Mauika's  fingers  and  toes  might  be  exhausted,  lest  he  should 
burn  him  with  it.  This  he  kept  constantly  doing : he  got 
successively  the  mapere,  or  middle  finger,  the  horoa,  or 
fore  finger,  and  the  rongo  matua , or  thumb  : having  finished 
the  fingers,  he  then  tried  to  obtain  the  toes,  and  got  all  but 
the  great  toe.  Maui  cried,  give  me  the  remaining  toe. 
Mauika  said,  No,  you  have  some  bad  design  towards  me. 
Maui  then  tossed  the  fire  from  his  hand,  and  burned 
Mauika  with  it,  as  well  as  the  land  and  the  trees.  Maui 
himself  was  all  but  consumed ; he  fled  in  one  direction,  and 
the  fire  pursuing  him  there,  he  fled  in  another,  but  the 
devouring  flames  still  followed  him ; and  finding  no  refuge 
on  earth,  he  flew  up  into  the  air,  and  called  for  the  small 
rain ; still  encircled  with  fire  for  the  greater  rain,  and  that 
not  sufficing,  for  the  heavy  rain,  which  came  pouring  down 
in  torrents,  and  soon  extinguished  the  flames,  and  flooded 
the  land.  When  the  waters  reached  the  tiki  tiki , or  top 
knot  of  Mauika's  head,  the  seeds  of  fire  which  had  taken 
refuge  there,  fled  to  the  Rata,  Hinau,  Kaikatea,  Rimu, 
Matai,  and  Miro ; but  these  trees  would  not  admit  them, 
they  then  went  to  the  Patete,  Kaikomako,  Mahohe,  Totara, 
and  Puketea,  which  received  them.  These  are  the  trees 
from  which  fire  is  still  obtained  by  friction. 

Emboldened  by  his  success  in  thus  destroying  Mauika,  he 
next  tried  to  put  out  the  sun  and  moon  ; he  set  snares  to  catch 
them,  and  kept  repeating  his  work,  but  in  vain  ; for  as  often 
as  he  placed  his  traps,  the  powerful  rays  of  the  sun  bit  them 
in  two.  Another  tradition  states  that  his  object  was  not  to 
kill,  but  to  lengthen  the  sun's  stay  on  earth,  and  hinder  his 
travelling  so  rapidly,  by  rendering  him  lame ; that  he  was 
successful  and  snared  the  sun,  whom  he  beat  so  unmerci- 
fully that  he  has  been  lame  ever  since,  and  so  travels 
slowly,  which  gives  longer  days  than  formerly.*  The  sun 
when  beaten,  cried  out  and  revealed  his  second  great  name, 
Tama-nui-te-ra.  After  all  this  hot  work,  Maui  naturally 

* This  seems  to  corroborate  their  coming  from  tropical  regions. 

IC  2 


132 


MYTHOLOGY. 


became  very  thirsty ; be  therefore  ashed  the  Tieke  to  go 
and  bring  him  some  water,  the  bird  paid  no  attention 
to  his  request  ; he  threw  it  into  the  water,  he  then 
called  another  bird,  the  Hihi,  to  go  and  bring  him  some; 
it  also  took  no  notice  of  his  request : he  cast  it  into  the 
fire,  and  its  feathers  were  burned  in  the  flames,  which 
accounts  for  its  color ; the  Totoara  was  next  tried,  but 
not  complying  with  his  request  he  placed  a streak  of 
white  near  its  nose,  as  a mark  for  its  incivility.  Maui  then 
asked  the  Kokako,  that  bird  was  immediately  obedient 
to  his  wish ; when  it  reached  the  water  it  filled  its  ears, 
and  then  returned  to  Maui ; he  drank  and  quenched  his 
thirst : as  a reward  he  pulled  the  bird's  legs  to  make  them 
long,  because  it  was  attentive  to  his  wish  and  brought  him 
water. 

Maui's  last  work  was  to  do  away  with  death ; noticing 
that  the  sun  and  moon  were  not  to  be  killed,  because 
they  bathed  in  the  living  fountain,  the  Wai  ora  Tane  ; 
he  determined,  to  do  the  same,  and  to  enter  the  womb 
of  Hine-nui-te-po,  that  is  Hades,  where  the  living  water — - 
the  life-giving  stream — was  situated.*  Great  night  draws 
all  into  her  womb,  but  permits  none  to  return.  Maui 
determined  to  try,  trusting  to  his  great  powers,  to  pass 
through  Hades,  and  to  come  out  from  the  jaws  of  death; 
but  before  he  made  the  attempt,  he  strictly  charged  his 
friends,  the  birds,  who  accompanied  bim,  not  to  laugh, 
he  then  commenced  the  attempt.  His  head  and  shoulders 
had  already  entered,  when  the  Piwaka-waka  began  to  laugh, 
night  closed  her  portals,  Maui  was  cut  in  two  and  died  ! 
Thus  death  came  into  the  world  ! had  it  not  laughed  Maui 
would  have  drank  of  the  living  stream,  escaped  by  the  mouth 
of  Hades,  and  man  never  died.f  Such  was  the  end  of  Maui ! 

* One  account  states  that  his  object  was  to  kill  Hine-nui-te-po,  and  carry- 
off  her  heart.  The  Aseroe,  a curious  red  fungus,  is  said  to  belong  to  Hine- 
nui-te-po. 

f We  can  scarcely  read  this  myth  without  thinking  of  the  new  birth  ; to  live 
eternally  we  must  be  born  again,  Maui  felt  it,  but  like  Nicodemus  misunder- 
stood its  true  nature. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


133 


Though  regarded  as  a god,  he  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  generally  prayed  to  as  one ; yet  he  was  invoked  for 
their  kumara  crops  and  success  in  fishing.  A karakia,  or 
jpure}  addressed  to  him  begins  as  follows  : 


Maui  e hoea  mai  to  heru, 
Mo  nga  pa  tuna, 

Te  heru  o Maui, 

Ko  i wano  ai,  whiti  mai 
Te  marama,  &c.,  &c. 


0 Maui  grant  me  thy  eel-fork,  for 
the  eel  weirs,  the  fork  of  Maui 
when  the  day  declines  and  the 
bright  moon  shines. 


Maui  is  also  said  to  have  tattoed  the  lips  of  the  native 
dog,  which  accounts  for  its  muzzle  being  always  black,  as 
Kahui-tara  tattoed  the  face  of  heaven,  and  made  it  dark, 
and  also  that  of  man.* 


* Ko  ta  Maui  uhi,  i taia  ki  te  Kuri,  ko  ta  te  Kahuitara  i taia  ki  te  rangi,  ka 
kikiwai,  kairunga  i taia  ano  hoki  ki  te  tangata. 


A MEMORIAL  IDOL  OF  A CHIEF  SLAIN  IN  BATTLE. 


a chief’s  house: 


CHAPTER  VII. 


MYTHOLOGY. 

(continued.) 

Before  the  mythology  of  the  Maori  is  further  considered, 
it  will  be  necessary  briefly  to  state  what  were  the  ideas  of 
God  entertained  by  the  natives.  The  word  Atua,  or  spirit, 
which  is  used  for  God,  formerly  had  various  significations ; 
a plague  or  disease  was  also  he  atua , or  God,  a thief  was  an 
atua,  thus  also  a thievish  dog  was  he  huri  atua,  a god-like  dog, 
so  also  he  tangata  atua  M te  muru,  a man  equal  to  a god  in 
stealing ; a child  who  pilfered  was  he  tamaiti  atua , a divine 
child ; there  were  great  spirits  and  small  ones,  a man’s 
spirit  was  an  atua  pore  pore,  a little  spirit ; but  Maru  Ron- 
gomai  and  other  gods  were,  Atua  nui , great  gods ; there 
were  atua  ika , reptile  or  fish  gods  ; a great  chief  was  called 
He  %ka3  a fish,  sea  monster,  or  reptile,  and  was  regarded  as 
a malignant  god  in  life,  and  a still  worse  one  after  death ; 
there  were  likewise  Atua  marau  as  the  toroa , albatross. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


135 


the  ruru,  owl ; and  karu  karu,  the  film  which  shades  its 
eye  from  the  light,  was  also  an  atua ; male  and  female 
spirits  presided  over  dreams,  and  were  regarded  as  atnas 
Ko  nga  atua  moe  moea  o te  rpoko,  the  gods  of  dreams ; 
Tunui  a rangi,  a male,  Pare  kewa , a female  deity,  both 
were  prayed  to  as  gods ; the  atua  kore  and  atua  kiko  kiko, 
were  inferior  gods.  The  Atua  ngarara , or  reptile  gods  were 
very  abundant,  and  were  supposed  to  be  the  cause  of  all 
diseases  and  death,*  being  always  ready  to  avail  themselves 
of  every  opportunity  of  crawling  down  the  throat  during 
sleep,  and  thus  preying  upon  the  lives  of  unfortunate  crea- 
tures. Atuas,  or  spirits  of  the  deceased  were  thought  to  be 
able  to  revisit  the  earth  and  reveal  to  their  friends  the  cause 
of  their  sickness. 

Everything  that  was  evil  or  noxious  was  supposed  especially 
to  belong  to  the  gods ; thus  a species  of  euphorbium,  whose 
milk  or  juice  is  highly  poisonous,  is  called  wai  u atua , the 
milk  of  the  gods. 

After  Maui  came  a host  of  gods,f  each  of  which  had  his 

* Arama  Karaka  Tinirau  being  very  much  troubled  with  boils  said,  “ Ko 
toku  atua  he  whewhe,”  his  god  or  plague  was  a boil. 

f These  were  some  of  the  creative  fathers  : — 

1 Tane  was  the  parent  (by  some  the  mother)  of  the  tui,  of  birds  in  general 

and  trees  ; he  is  also  called  Tane  Mahuta. 

2 Ru,  the  father  of  lakes  and  rivers. 

3 Rupe , of  the  pigeon. 

4 Tangaroa,  of  fish. 

5 Irawaru , of  dogs. 

6 Nga  rangi-hore , of  stones. 

7 Mauika , of  fire. 

8 Maui , of  the  land. 

9 Mumuhanga,  of  the  Totara  ; also  called  Tukau  moana,  hence  the  proverb, 

Ko  te  maramara  o tu  kau  moana. 

10  Paruri , of  the  Tui.  Tane  and  Parauri  were  married. 

1 1 Papa , of  the  Kiwi. 

12  Owa,  of  the  dog  ; he  was  also  the  father  of  Irawaru. 

13  Pahiko , of  the  Kaka. 

14  Punga  Matua , of  the  shark,  tuatini,  lizard,  and  tamuri. 

15  Tute  maona,  of  the  Kahikatoa. 
ifi  Hina-moki , of  the  rat. 

1 7 Tuwairore , of  the  Kahikatea  and  Rimu. 

18  Haere-azva-awa , of  the  Weka. 


136 


MYTHOLOGY. 


history  and  wonderful  deeds,  which  entitled  him  to  a place 
in  the  Maori  calendar.  These  were  ancestors,  who  became 
deified  by  their  respective  tribes,  each  having  its  peculiar 
god ; Tu  was  the  great  god  of  war  in  the  north,  and  Maru 
in  the  south.  Rongo-mai  was  the  chief  god  of  Taupo. 

There  were  also  gods  with  human  forms,  and  others 
with  those  of  reptiles  ; as  in  geology  there  is  a reptile 
age,  so  was  there  in  the  mythology  of  New  Zealand  ; at 
one  period  there  seems  to  have  been  a mixed  offspring 
from  the  same  parents,  thus,  whilst  Tawaki  was  of  the 
human  form,  his  brethren  were  taniwa  and  sharks ; there 
were  likewise  mixed  marriages  amongst  them,  it  shows 
how  low  the  mind  of  man  may  fall,  when  given  up  to  strong 
delusions.  These  ancestral  gods  still  hold  their  places  in  the 
genealogical  tables  of  the  different  tribes,  and  supernatural 
powers  are  said  to  have  been  possessed  by  certain  families 
almost  up  to  the  present  time ; thus  at  Waitotara  there  was 
a winged  race  of  men,*  whose  descendants  still  remain  : Te 

19  Rongo , of  the  Kumara  ; also  called  Rongomatane. 

20  Tiki , of  man. 

21  Tute-nga-nahu,  of  evil. 

22  Tahiti  of  all  good. 

23  Tawiri-matea , of  the  winds. 

24  Mokoikuwaru , of  lizards. 

25  Otunai-rangi , of  the  palm  tree  (nikau),  and  flax  (harakeke). 

26  Haumia , of  the  fern  root. 

27  Tomaircmgi , of  dew. 

28  Haupapa , of  ice. 

29  Hciuhunga , of  cold. 

These  three  were  the  children  of  Tawirimatea. 

30  Te-apn  hau , father  of  storm  and  tempests. 

Tu  is  also  called — 

1 Tumatauenga , the  distorted  faced  Tu. 

2 Tukariri , the  angry  Tu. 

3 Tukanguha,  the  flaming  Tu. 

4 Tukaitaua , the  war  consuming  Tu. 

5 Tuwhaka-heke-tangata , the  man  consumer. 

6 Tumata-whaiti , the  maker  of  a face  small. 

* Whanau  Moana  o te  tamaiti  tua  toru  o Turi,  ka  panga  tona  ewe  ki  te 
moana,  ka  pae  ana  ki  te  one,  ara  ki  te  uraura,  ka  kitea  e nga  tangata,  ka  tongo- 
hia  mai,  walca-iria  ki  te  tunga  roa  o te  whare,  i kitea  atu  ka  korikori,  kua  wai 
tangata,  no  te  putanga  mai  he  tangata,  ka  rere  mai  ka  whai  mai  i tona  tinana 


MYTHOLOGY. 


137 


Kahui-rere,  the  last  person  possessing  wings,  lost  them  by 
his  wife  unfortunately  laying  down  upon  them  whilst  he 
slept. 

In  fact;  in  the  accounts  which  the  natives  give  of  their 
gods,  and  their  exploits,  we  have  but  a magnified  history 
of  their  chiefs,  their  wars,  murders,  and  lusts,  with  the  addi- 
tion of  soQie  supernatural  powers ; they  were  cannibals ; 
influenced  by  like  feelings  and  passions  as  men,  and  were 
uniformly  bad  ; to  them  were  ascribed  all  the  evils  incident 
to  the  human  race ; each  disease  was  supposed  to  be  occa- 
sioned by  a different  god,  who  resided  in  the  part  affected ; 
thus,  Tonga,  the  god  who  caused  headache,  took  up  his 
abode  in  the  forehead;  Moko  Titi,  a lizard  god,  was  the 
source  of  all  pains  in  the  breast;  Tu-tangata-kino  was  the 
god  of  the  stomach  ; Titihai  occasioned  pains  in  the  ankles 
and  feet ; Rongomai  and  Tuparitapua  were  the  gods  of  con- 
sumption, and  the  wasting  away  of  the  legs  and  arms; 
Koro-kio-ewe  presided  over  childbirth,  and  did  his  worst  to 
unfortunate  females  in  that  state.  In  fact,  the  entire  human 
body  appears  to  have  been  shared  out  amongst  those  evil 
beings,  who  ruled  over  each  part,  to  afflict  and  pain  the 
poor  creatures  who  worshipped  them ; Rebua  especially 
presided  over  the  side ; Purakau  was  the  god  of  witchcraft ; 
and  Tote  of  sudden  death.  This  portioning  out  of  the  body 
was,  however,  much  the  same  amongst  the  heathen  generally; 
the  Greeks  and  Romans  had  their  gods  and  goddesses,  each 

Whanau  Moana,  ka  noho  ai  ki  Wai  totara,  ko  tai  ake,  o te  one  kaha  whai,  na 
ka  puta  ki  waho  ko  Tararere,  ko  Tarapunga  te  manu  i te  ra,  Tarakapu  whenua 
Kapunga  rauru. 

Wanau  Moana  was  the  offspring  of  Turi’s  third  son  ; his  navel  string  having 
been  thrown  into  the  sea,  drifted  on  shore,  where  it  was  seen  by  some  per- 
sons, who  carried  it  away,  and  suspended  it  from  the  ridge  pole  of  their  house  ; 
they  noticed  that  it  moved  and  had  life  ; it  grew  up  to  be  a man  and  had 
wings  ; Te  Whanau  Moana,  sea  bom,  lived  on  the  side  of  Wai-totara  next 
the  sea ; he  became  the  father  of  Tararere,  Tarapunga,  the  bird  of  the 
day.  Tarakapu  whenua,  Kapunga  rauru.  These  winged  people  flew  openly 
in  the  day  ; at  first  they  had  no  regular  home,  but  went  about  from  one  place 
to  another,  sometimes  alighting  on  the  tops  of  mountains,  sometimes  flying 
to  an  island  of  the  sea,  until  one  of  their  number,  named  Tara  pu- whenua, 
caused  them  to  dwell  in  pas.  This  \yonderful  race  belonged  exclusively  to 
Waitotara,  and  lived  at  Tieki  Moerangi. 


138 


MYTHOLOGY. 


having*  his  or  her  peculiar  department,  and  they  have  been 
succeeded  by  the  male  and  female  saints  of  their  churches, 
which  have  thus  carefully  preserved  a close  relationship  to 
their  venerated  ancestors. 

Maru,  one  of  the  native  gods,  bears  a remarkable  resem- 
blance to  Mars  ; like  him,  he  is  the  god  of  war ; he  was 
killed  and  eaten  when  on  earth,  but  his  divinity  flew  up  to 
heaven,  and  the  planet  Mars,  from  his  fiery  color,  is  called 
after  him.  This  god  had  many  names,  as 
Maru  i te  Aewa 
„ — Koeta 
,,  — Anaunau 
,,  — Waka  tamara 
„ — Tahuri  mai 
„ — Takotua 
“ — Tawakarere 
“ — Biri 
“ — Nguha 
“ — Mataitai 

These  names  were  descriptive  of  his  various  evil  qualities ; 
his  going  to  and  fro  as  an  adversary ; chattering  defiance  ; 
looking  down  malignantly ; causing  disease ; flaming  with 
wrath;  full  of  anger  and  bitterness,  there  can  scarcely  be 
a more  perfect  description  of  the  evil  spirit.  Maru  was  also 
a god  of  the  Sandwich  Isles.  This  deity  being  constantly 
engaged  in  evil,  had  no  time  to  grow  food,  and  was  indig- 
nant if  he  were  not  liberally  supplied,  and  with  the  best  by 
his  votaries.  He  was  a god  highly  esteemed  by  his  priests, 
who  grew  fat  in  his  service. 

The  history  of  one  of  these  gods  will  be  a specimen 
and  furnish  a faithful  index  of  the  national  mind.  No 
god  figures  more  in  the  Maori  mythology  of  later  ages 
than  Tawaki ; originally  men  were  not  aware  that  he  was 
a deity,  until  one  day  he  ascended  a lofty  hill,  and  some 
who  were  cutting  brush  wood,  saw  him  throw  aside  his 
vile  garments,  and  clothe  himself  with  lightning,  they  then 
recognized  him  as  a god. 

When  Waitiri,  his  grandmother,  descended  from  heaven, 


MYTHOLOGY. 


139 


the  fame  of  Kai-tangata  and  his  bravery  reached  her;  on  her 
arriving  near  his  dwelling,  she  slew  her  favorite  slave 
Anonokia,  and  took  out  his  lungs  as  an  offering  for  Kai- 
tangata,  which  she  presented  to  him.  Kai-tangata  feared 
her.  Waitiri  said,  the  fame  of  your  bravery  reached  me, 
it  was  an  uncertain  report  however.  I therefore  came  to 
judge  for  myself,  and  have  killed  my  favourite  slave,  to 
propitiate  your  favour ; they  became  man  and  wife  : their 
first  born  was  Punga,  the  next  Karihi,  and  the  youngest 
Hema. 

Their  children  were  not  particularly  clean,  Kai-tangata 
turned  up  his  nose  and  said,  Hu  ! the  filthy  children  ! Wai- 
tiri was  offended  ; she  then  gave  names  to  her  offspring, 
and  said  to  them,  Punga,  the  anchor  of  your  father's  canoe 
is  your  name  as  the  elder ; for  the  second  Karihi,  or  the 
sinker  of  your  father's  net ; for  my  youngest,  I leave  as  a 
name  Whaka  Makanga,  my  shame,  on  account  of  your 
father's  word  about  you,  afterwards  she  ascended  to  heaven; 
her  parting  words  were, — When  Punga  has  children,  do 
not  let  them  follow  me ; she  called  to  Karihi,  when  you 
have  growu  up,  do  not  suffer  your  children  to  go  and  seek 
me;  but  when  my  Waka  Makanga  has  a child,  he  may  come 
to  me;  these  were  the  parting  words  of  Waitiri;  she  then 
ascended  up  into  heaven.  When  Kai-tangata  returned  from 
the  sea,  he  asked  his  children,  where  is  your  mother? — they 
answered,  she  has  gone  to  heaven,  her  dwelling  place. 
Kai-tangata  inquired,  what  did  she  say  to  you  ? — she  said, 
that  Punga,  the  anchor  of  your  canoe,  was  to  be  my  name ; 
that  for  this  here,  pointing  to  his  brother,  Karihi,  the 
sinker  of  your  net;  that  for  our  sister,  the  Waka  Makanga 
of  our  mother,  for  turning  up  your  nose  at  us  : they  went 
and  showed  to  their  father  the  Paepae  she  had  made.* 

The  offspring  of  Punga  and  Karihi  were  the  lizard,  shark, 
and  dog-fish ; the  child  of  Hema  was  Tawaki.  The  elder 
brethren  took  Muri-waka-roto  and  Kohuhango  as  their  wives ; 
these  women  were  not  satisfied  with  their  husbands,  they 
preferred  Tawaki ; his  elder  relatives  hated  him  ; they  said, 

* A temple  of  Cloacina,  one  of  the  chief  Maori  constellations. 


140 


MYTHOLOGY. 


let  us  follow  him  to  Wai-ranga-tuhi,  where  he  has  gone  to 
wash.  Tawaki  prayed — 

a 

Pupu  mahine  i te  ata,  homai  ra  ta-  Let  the  morning  spring  forth  : 
kn  hern,  kia  whano  au  ki  te  give  me  my  comb,  that  I may 
wai  Rangituhi,  te  wai  Rangituhi  arise  and  go  to  the  water  of 

e-hai.  Rangatuhi,  Rangatuhi. 

They  found  their  brother  there,  and  slew  him  : after  he 
was  dead,  they  returned  home.  Muri-waka-roto  demanded, 
where  is  your  younger  brother  ? Mango,  the  shark,  said, 
at  the  water  combing  his  hair.  She  waited  a long  time, 
and  then  went  and  called  Tawaki-e- ; the  bird  Pukeko  an- 
awered,  -ke- ; she  went  and  again  called  to  Tawaki,  the 
Moho,  another  bird,  answered,  -hu-  ; she  returned  home 
and  said,  you  have  killed  your  brother,  they  confessed  they 
had  done  so ; they  inquired,  did  he  not  answer  your  call  ? 
she  replied,  the  Pukeko  and  the  Moho  only  heard  me  ; no, 
Tawaki  is  gone  to  karakia,  and  mix  his  blood  with  water- 
blood,  star-blood,  and  the  blood  of  what  ? with  the  blood  of 
the  moon,  the  blood  of  the  sun,  and  the  blood  of  Rangi- 
Mahuki ; this  is  the  flowing  of  Tawakfls  blood ; truly  causing 
it  to  flow,*  that  he  might  be  restored  to  life.  Tawaki  is  alive 
again ! He  slept  soundly  on  the  sea  shore  after  his  resurrec- 
tion from  below,  from  the  Reinga,  he  sleeps  by  the  sea  side  : 
a great  wave  appeared,  rolling  in  from  afar,  that  wave 
came  to  overwhelm  him,  but  his  ancestor  the  Kaiaia, 
sparrow  hawk,  appeared,  and  cryed,  ke-ke-ke-ke.  Tawaki 
awoke ; he  started  up  from  his  sleep,  seized  a stick,  and 
casting  it  defied  the  wave,  it  glanced  on  one  side  of  the 
billow,  which  was  drifting  toward  him  from  afar — enough 
Tawaki  left  the  shore  and  went  inland.  His  uncle  Karihi 
overtook  him  ; they  wept  together.  Afterwards  they  arrived 
at  the  toimau,  outside  or  verge  of  heaven,  the  fence  which 
divides  it  from  the  earth.  Tawaki  called  out  to  his  uncle, 
do  you  climb  up  first,  his  relative  answered,  no,  you  go 
before.  Tawaki  again  called  upon  him  to  go  first,  his  uncle 

* The  union  of  all  these  kinds  of  blood  formed  life,  and  thus  resuscitated 
Tawaki. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


141 


did  so,  and  laid  hold  with  his  hands  on  the  fence  which 
encircled  it.  Whilst  Karihi  was  climbing  up,  Tawaki  uttered 
this  spell — 


E tu  te  rangi  motuhia, 
E tu  te  rang-i  pukai, 
Pukai  atua  ana, 

I raro  i te  whenua. 


Stand  the  severed  heaven, 
Stand  the  heaped  up  sky, 
Heaped  up  apart 
Beneath  the  earth. 


His  uncle  slipped  down,  quite  down  to  the  ground,  when 
Karihi  came  to  him,  he  said,  it  was  your  spell  which  made 
me  fall,  otherwise  I should  have  quite  ascended.  Tawaki 
denied  his  having  uttered  any ; now  said  he,  do  you  remain, 
and  let  me  try.  Tawakds  hand  laid  hold  of  the  fence,  and 
he  used  this  charm  : — 


Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 

Ascend, 


Tawaki,  to  the  first  heaven  : 
Tawaki,  to  the  second  heaven 
Tawaki,  to  the  third  heaven  : 
Tawaki,  to  the  fourth  heaven  : 
Tawaki,  to  the  fifth  heaven  : 
Tawaki,  to  the  sixth  heaven  : 
Tawaki,  to  the  seventh  heaven 
Tawaki,  to  the  eighth  heaven  : 
Tawaki,  to  the  ninth  heaven  : 
Tawaki,  to  the  tenth  heaven  : 
Cling,  cling,  like  the  lizard, 
Stick,  stick  close  to  the  side 


let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

let 

the 

fair 

sky 

to  the  ceiling, 
of  heaven.* 


consent. 

consent. 

consent. 

consent. 

consent. 

consent. 

consent. 

consent. 

consent. 

consent. 


Tawaki  succeeded ; he  reached  the  sky  and  cut  off  the  rope 
by  which  he  ascended  ; his  uncle  called  to  him  to  turn  back, 
and  help  him  to  get  up  ; but  he  answered  from  above, 
No,  you  all  aided  in  my  murder ; he  then  went  on  and 
arrived  at  the  dwelling-place  of  his  grandmother,  Waitiri, 
and  came  up  to  her ; she  was  blind,  sitting  down  counting 
her  seed  kumara.  One  kumara,  two  kumara,  &c.,  ten  kumara 


* See  Note  page. 1 14. 

f It  is  said  that  Tawaki  ascended  to  heaven  by  a spider’s  thread.  Another 
tradition  states,  that  Waitiri  uttered  the  spell,  and  Tawaki  slipped  down  ; also 
that  he  ascended  by  means  of  a line  of  aka,  which  hung  down  from  heaven. 


142 


MYTHOLOGY. 


[toto  tahi,  toto  rua,  toto,  &c.,  toto  tekau]  ; he  pulled  one 
of  them  to  his  side,  there  remained  nine  ; missing  the  tenth 
she  counted  them  over  again ; one  kumara,  &c. ; where  is 
the  tenth  ? Tawaki  took  the  ninth,  and  left  eight ; Waitiri 
recounted,  and  missed  another ; she  again  counted,  but  he 
kept  taking  one  after  the  other,  until  all  were  gone;  Waitiri 
then  enquired,  who  is  this  that  is  playing  tricks  upon  me,  and 
taking  away  my  seed  kumara  ? Tawaki  said,  It  is  I,  Waitiri. 
She  said,  you,  who  are  you  ? It  is  I,  it  is  Tawaki,  the  only 
child  of  Hema.  Waitiri  exclaimed.  Aye,  aye,  my  grandchild. 
It  was  you,  said  he,  who  gave  your  last  command  that  I should 
come  and  seek  you.  Aye,  aye,  said  Waitiri,  that  is  quite 
true  ; but  look  at  my  eyes,  Tawaki  said,  What  is  the  matter 
with  them  ? By  and  bye,  said  Waitiri,  you  shall  see  : in 
the  evening  the  house  will  be  filled  with  birds,  which  have 
caused  my  blindness,  by  scratching  them  with  their  claws; 
do  you  place  yourself  in  the  stuffing  of  the  sides  of  the 
house.  Tawaki  enquired,  where  is  their  entrance  ? by 
the  door  and  the  window.  Tawaki  attended  to  her  words  ; 
he  made  snares  for  the  door  and  window,  when  the  sun 
set,  he  entered,  and  said,  when  all  have  come  in,  stop 
up  the  entrance  from  above  and  below,  that  they  may  be 
quite  awake,  and  the  day  advanced  before  they  get  up  to 
depart;  Waitiri  promised  to  do  so;  when  the  sun  set,  an 
immense  flock  of  very  little  birds  came  flying  to  the  pianga, 
or  window,  Tongo-hiti  was  one  of  them,  when  Waitiri  saw 
that  they  had  filled  the  house,  she  closed  the  openings 
above  and  below;  then  they  slept,  the  morning  star  set, 
they  did  not  awake,  the  day  dawned,  still  they  slept,  the 
rays  of  the  sun  descended,  yet  they  did  not  arise,  it  was 
near  noon,  some  of  them  exclaimed,  what  a long  night  ; 
Waitiri  called  to  them,  sleep,  day  has  not  yet  dawned  ; 
Tongo-hiti  and  others,  at  the  same  time,  said,  the  night 
must  have  passed  away,  daylight  must  be  coming  on  apace, 
the  night  is  so  long,  a trick  of  Waitiri  perhaps  upon  us; 
she  replied,  no ; then  Tawaki  arose,  drew  out  the  stopping 
from  above,  and  entered;  he  slew  all  but  Tongo-hiti,  who 
crept  out  under  the  back  post  of  the  house,  and  escaped. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


143 


This  was  all — they  were  killed.  Then  Tawaki  spit  upon  the 
ground,  made  clay,  and  anointing  her  eyes,  uttered  this 
spell  over  Waitiri : — 


Irimata,  Irimata,  Wave  before  your  eyes,  Wave  before  your  eyes 

Weromata,  Weromata,  Thou  smitten  blind,  thou  smitten  blind, 

He  wai  o mata  ki  te  ra,  Be  your  eyes  bright, 


He  hurumai  ra, 

He  pa  ko  rirerire, 
Hae  tahi  ki  te  mata, 
0 Waitiri  rua  ki  te 
Mata  o Waitiri, 
Titiromai  ra, 
Kakanomai  ra, 

Ki  te  mata  ora, 

Ki  te  mata  o Rehua 


Like  the  sun  that  rises  there, 
Since  you  are  so  greatly  afflicted, 
Once  to  the  eyes  of  Waitiri, 

Twice  to  the  eyes 
of  Waitiri, 

Look  this  way, 

Glance  this  way, 

With  your  healed  eyes, 

With  your  star-like  eyes. 

Aye,  aye,  my  eyes  are  cured,  my  grandson. 


Another  tradition  states,  Tawaki  was  a man  of  this 
world.  Hapai  beheld  him  from  above  and  admired  his 
great  superiority ; she  left  Heaven  and  came  to  him  in 
the  night  when  he  slept.  Tawaki  knew  not  whence  she 
came,  of  course  he  thought  she  belonged  to  this  world, 
but  before  day  dawned  she  was  gone,  and  had  returned 
to  Heaven.  Tawaki  arose  and  hunted  about  their  sleep- 
ing place  for  her,  but  in  vain  ; this  became  the  constant 
practice  of  Hapai  every  night ; at  last  she  showed  herself  to 
Tawaki  and  stayed  with  him  during  the  day  also,  then 
first  did  he  learn  that  the  woman  was  from  Heaven,  and 
she  said  to  him  ‘f  When  our  child  shall  be  born  if  it  should 
be  a male  I will  wash  it,  but  if  it  should  be  a female  you  shall 
do  so.”  A female  child,  Pianga,  was  born ; so  Tawaki 
commenced  his  office  and  washed  the  child,  afterwards  he 
complained  of  its  being  offensive.  Hapai  wept ; she  then 
arose  and  went  and  stood  on  the  top  of  the  teke  teke,  or 
image  which  stands  on  the  summit  of  the  gable  end  of  the 
roof.  Tawaki  immediately  ran  out  to  catch  her,  but  he 
did  not  succeed,  he  found  she  really  was  from  Heaven, 
when  he  beheld  her  departure  and  disappearance,  then  the 


144 


MYTHOLOGY. 


man  began  to  think  of  his  loss  ; a moon  waned  and  passed 
away.  He  called  his  two  slaves,  let  ns  go  and  track  the 
child,  they  set  off  and  came  to  the  road,  then  said  he  to  the 
slaves  when  we  come  to  the  pa  of  Tongameha  mind  yon  do 
not  look  at  it.  They  went  on  and  at  last  reached  the  place; 
one  of  the  slaves  neglected  the  warning : he  looked  at  it  and 
Tongameha  immediately  plucked  out  his  eye ; then  the 
other  slave  and  Tawaki  went  on  and  reached  the  dwelling 
place  of  Mata  kerepo  his  great  grandmother  : they  surprised 
the  old  woman,  who  was  blind,  counting  her  taro  which 
laid  in  a heap  before  her;  she  counted  one,  two,  &c.,  to 
ten,  Tawaki  took  the  tenth,  she  counted  them  over  again, 
when  she  got  to  the  ninth  Tawaki  took  it  ; again  she 
counted  up  to  the  eigdith  and  two  were  gone,  then  the 
woman  snuffed  up  the  air  and  made  her  stomach  swell  out 
to  swallow  up  Tawaki ; in  her  snuffing  up  she  snuffed  to- 
wards the  south,  but  the  scent  did  not  reach  her  thence ; she 
then  snuffed  up  all  the  breezes  from  the  east,  then  from  the 
west,  and  now  she  scented  him  and  said  from  the  wind 

which  touches  my  skin  I perceive  you  : from  the  loud 

breathing  which  Tawaki  made,  she  exclaimed,  truly  this 
is  my  grandchild,  Tawaki ; immediately  the  swelling  of 
her  stomach  began  to  subside ; but  if  the  scent  had  not  come 
from  the  west  he  certainly  would  have  been  swallowed  up  by 
her.  Then  the  woman  asked  him  where  are  you  going.to? 
Tawaki  replied,  to  find  my  daughter ; where  ? in  Heaven. 
Why  will  you  go  to  Heaven  ? Tawaki  replied,  there  her 
mother  lives,  a daughter  of  Waitiri  matakataka.  This  is 
your  road,  take  the  morning-  for  your  ascent;  the  man 
called  his  slave,  cook  the  food  ; it  was  cooked,  it  was 

ready;  the  man  took  the  food  of  the  oven;  he  spit  upon  it,  and 

anointed  the  eyes  of  his  grandmother,  behold  her  sight  was 
restored.  The  man  slept  soundly ; in  the  morning  he  called 
to  the  slave,  cook  food  to  give  strength  for  the  journey, 
when  the  food  was  finished,  he  went  with  his  slave  and  gave 
him  as  a payment  to  the  old  woman ; she  said,  this  is  your 
way,  hold  on  with  your  hand,  climb  up  by  the  middle,  and 
be  sure  you  do  not  look  down  lest  you  should  be  giddy, 


MYTHOLOGY. 


145 


should  you  fall  I shall  be  grieved  as  you  have  been  kind 
to  me ; this  is  all  about  the  climbing  of  Tawaki.  The 
old  woman  repeated  the  spell,  Ascend  Tawaki  to  the  first 
heaven,  to  the  second  heaven,  thence  your  origin,  screw  up 
your  courage,  this  is  the  path  of  Tawaki  the  son  of  Hema. 
Tawaki  has  climbed  to  the  first  and  second  heaven,  the  road 
of  Tawaki  the  road  of  Hema.  Tawaki  ascended  up,  he  dis- 
guised his  person  and  made  it  vile,  he  proceeded  and  was 
seen  by  his  brothers-in-law,  the  men  who  were  adzing  a 
canoe ; they  cried  out,  this  is  our  old  man,  the  man  came  up 
and  remained  by  their  side  : when  it  was  evening  the  men 
called  out,  Sir,  carry  the  tools,  will  you  ? they  gave  them  to 
him.  The  old  fellow  said,  Go  on  before,  I can't  walk  so  fast : 
he  followed  behind,  and  seizing  the  adze,  polished  off  the 
prow  even  to  the  stern,  and  from  the  stern  to  the  prow ; 
having  finished  both  sides  he  carried  the  adzes  and  went  on 
till  he  came  to  the  Kainga ; he  saw  Hapai  sitting  with  his 
daughter,  and  walked  straight  up  to  her,  all  exclaimed,  You 
must  not  go  there,  you  will  be  made  tapu  by  the  side  of 
Hapai,  but  paying  no  attention  to  them,  he  went  and  sat 
down  by  her,  until  the  day  dawned.  In  the  morning  his 
wife's  brethren  called  out,  Sir,  wont  you  carry  the  tools  ? 
they  all  went  together  to  work  at  the  canoe ; when  they 
came  to  it  his  wife's  brethren  stared  and  said,  the  canoe 
has  got  a different  fashion,  somebody  else  has  been  to  it; 
who  can  have  done  it  ? they  remained  until  it  was  quite 
evening,  then  they  again  called  to  the  old  man,  Come, 
Sir,  and  take  up  the  tools.  Yes,  he  replied,  but  loitered 
behind,  and  then  returned  and  finished  the  canoe;  when 
he  went  to  the  Kainga  he  walked  straight  up  to  the  seat 
of  Hapai  and  there  sat  down  ; the  next  day  they  returned  to 
their  work ; the  men  again  exclaimed  with  astonishment, 
and  when  it  was  evening  they  determined  to  discover  the 
man  who  had  adzed  it ; they  therefore  went  and  concealed 
themselves  amongst  the  tufts  of  grass.  Soon  after  Tawaki 
came  for  his  garments  he  had  left  behind,  and  dressed 
himself  up  with  the  greatest  ca,re ; now  when  his  wife's 
brethren  saw  him,  they  exclaimed,  Oh  it  is  the  old  fellow 

L 


146 


MYTHOLOGY. 


who  has  adzed  our  canoe  * one  called  to  another,  My  friends 
come  and  see  him,  he  has  got  quite  a different  look,  he 
must  be  a God.  They  set  off  to  their  dwelling  place  and 
enquired  of  Hapai,  what  was  the  appearance  of  your  hus- 
band ? the  woman  described  him,  then  they  exclaimed,  Yes, 
indeed  that  is  altogether  his  look.  When  he  arrived  the 
woman  kept  demanding,  who  are  you  ? Tawaki  went  straight 
on,  are  you  Tawaki  ? Yes,  yes,  indeed.  When  he  reached 
the  side  of  the  woman  he  caught  hold  of  his  daughter  who 
had  gone  to  him ; they  all  ran  out,  for  the  place  was  made 
sacred  by  Tawaki.  The  tribe  loudly  expressed  its  admira- 
tion of  his  noble  appearance,  one  day  he  put  on  one  form 
and  another  day  a different  one.  They  dwelt  together,  he 
and  his  wife ; he  said,  I have  come  that  our  child  may  be 
named,  to  this  Hapai  assented.  When  the  day  dawned, 
they  took  down  a portion  of  the  back  gable  of  the  house,  as 
a road  for  the  child  to  go  out  by.*  This  is  the  Takai  or 
speech  which  was  then  uttered  as  she  went — 

“ Go  forth  0 daughter  (great.) 

Go  forth  by  the  honorable  road, 

The  long  line  of  Tinirau, 

Go  forth  and  return, 

0 Hineireire,  Hineireire  be 
Thy  name  given  at  Motu  tapu. 

The  lightning  glances, 

The  lightning  darts  forth, 

From  the  armpits  of  Tawaki.” 

They  took  her  to  the  water  and  when  they  reached  it  they 
baptized  and  named  her,  saying — 

May  thy  foot  frequent  the  great  courts, 

The  long  courts,  the  courts  of  Hine, 

0 my  daughter. 

May  Puanga  baptize  thee 
With  the  water  of  Moto  ikuwai 

* When  the  child  of  a great  chief  was  named,  instead  of  its  being  carried  out 
by  the  door  an  opening  was  made  for  it  through  the  side  of  the  building,  as  a 
mark  of  respect.  So  when  a great  chief  entered  a pa,  if  the  people  wished  to 
treat  him  with  distinction,  they  jvould  not  suffer  him  to  enter  by  the  gate,  but 
pulled  down  a portion  of  the  fortifications  for  him  to  pass  through. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


147 


Let  her  be  baptized  by  Puanga, 

With  the  day  which  glides, 

Which  glides  away,  which  lingers. 

Let  her  be  baptized,  let  the  water  cover  her, 

Let  her  be  baptized,  let  the  wave  fall  over  her, 

Let  her  be  baptized  to  Tu, 

With  the  wave  following  after  as  a companion 
With  the  water  of  Pnanga  mata  kurae, 

Of  Puanga  with  the  sliding  day, 

Glancing  day,  lingering  day. 

Such  is  a portion  of  a very  long  myth ; a great  deal  of  which 
will  not  bear  repeating ; it  is  interesting  as  shewing  what  ideas 
were  entertained  of  their  gods,  and  heaven,  which,  from  this 
account,  differed  little  from  the  earth,  having  its  dwellings  and 
cultivations ; its  inhabitants  likewise  had  their  labors,  quarrels, 
passions,  need  of  food,  as  other  men ; the  persons  alluded  to, 
were  chief  gods.  The  way  they  manifested  themselves  to 
men  was  various — the  whirlwind  indicated  the  presence  of  a 
deity ; the  rain  bow  was  exclusively  the  property  of  Uenuku  ; 
the  lightning  and  thunder  belonged  to  Whiro ; meteors,  or 
any  unaccountable  noise,  were  tokens  of  the  presence  of  a 
god.  Sometimes  they  manifested  themselves  in  the  forms 
of  spiders,  moths,  and  flies;  but  chiefly  by  the  mouths  of 
their  priests,  of  which  they  took  possession ; during  that 
period,  the  person  thus  possessed  appeared  quite  frantic, 
uttering  the  most  fearful  cries,  and  distorted  in  every  limb ; 
whilst  in  this  state,  everything  he  said,  or  did,  was  con- 
sidered as  the  immediate  act  of  the  god  within  him. 

Heroes  were  thought  to  become  stars,  of  greater  or  less 
brightness,  according  to  the  number  of  their  victims  slain 
in  fight ; they  scooped  out  their  eyes  and  swallowed  them, 
in  order  to  obtain  the  spirit  and  power  of  the  enemy  slain. 
The  spirit  of  a chief,  thus  consuming  those  of  the  slain, 
was  raised  above  men ; he  became  a god  even  upon  earth, 
and,  after  death*  a bright  luminary  of  heaven. 

Of  the  gods  of  the  night,  Hine-nui-te-po  ranks  the  high- 
est, more  being  spoken  of  her  than  of  all  the  others ; and 
yet,  she  only  appears  to  be  a personification  of  night  and 

l 2 


148 


MYTHOLOGY. 


Hades;  prayers  were  addressed  to  her;  she  was  known  in 
Tonga,  Tahaiti,  and  Hawaii,  with  a slight  change  of  name 
and  history.  Po,  or  night,  was  the  great  name  for  Hades, 
although,  in  general,  the  Reinga,  which  is  only  its  entrance, 
is  spoken  of,  instead  of  the  place  itself,  the  word  literally 
meaning  the  place  where  these  spirits  jumped  into  Po. 

The  general  estimation  in  which  the  gods  were  held  by 
the  natives,  was  not  a slavish  one ; they  rather  regarded 
them  as  powerful  enemies,  who  were  to  be  rendered  harm- 
less by  the  aid  of  charms  or  spells  ; and  to  avoid  their  ill 
will,  offerings  were  made  to  them  : still,  they  firmly  believed 
in  their  existence  and  power  of  visibly  interfering  with 
human  affairs. 

The  following  account  was  given  by  a chief,  who  was  in  a 
war  expedition  against  the  Ngatiawa,  at  Otaki.  They  were 
endeavouring  to  storm  the  powerful  pa  Kakutu,  at  Rangi- 
uru  ; at  noon,  when  encamped  opposite  the  beleagured 
place,  Puta,  the  Priest  of  Taupo,  who  was  in  their  party, 
stood  and  prayed  to  Rongo-mai,  the  great  god  of  his  tribe, 
that  he  would  manifest  himself  in  their  favor,  and  give  the 
pa  into  their  hands  ; immediately  a great  noise  was  heard 
in  the  heavens,  and  they  saw  Rongo-mai  rushing  through 
the  air,  his  form,  which  is  that  of  a whale,  was  of  fire,  with 
a great  head,  he  flew  straight  into  the  pa,  which  he  entered 
with  his  head  downwards,  knocking  up  the  dust  which  arose 
in  a cloud  with  a crash  like  thunder  ; the  Priest  said,  in 
two  days  the  place  would  be  taken,  which  accordingly  came 
to  pass  ; my  informant,  a very  sensible  Christian  Chief,  be- 
lieved it  was  actually  the  god  who  appeared,  I bid  him  draw 
his  form,  which  he  did ; it  was  evidently  a meteor,  and  a 
very  bright  one,  to  have  been  thus  apparent  at  noon ; this, 
however,  is  by  no  means  uncommon  in  New  Zealand,  where 
they  appear  to  be  far  more  frequently  seen  than  in  the 
northern  hemisphere.  It  is  remarkable  that  it  should  have 
been  seen  at  the  very  moment  the  Priest  was  praying  for 
his  god  to  appear,  and  further  that  it  should  have  fallen  into 
the  very  pa  they  were  attacking ; it  was  natural  that  it 
should  have  been  regarded  as  a favorable  omen  by  the  one, 


MYTHOLOGY. 


149 


and  as  the  contrary  by  the  others ; had  the  besieged  not 
been  intimidated,  but  fought  courageously  and  conquered, 
then  it  would  doubtless  have  been  considered  a favorable 
omen  for  them  ; it  is  according  to  the  result  that  such 
sights  are  estimated,  and  as  many  are  seen  without  anything 
remarkable  occurring,  nothing  is  thought  of  them,  but  only  of 
the  few  which  are  attended  with  any  particular  consequence, 
as  in  this  instance.  A similar  circumstance  occurred  to  me 
during  a journey  into  the  interior  of  the  island.  I was  preach- 
ing from  the  words,  “ Behold  I saw  Satan  like  lightning  fall 
from  heaven,”  and  had  no  sooner  concluded,  than  the  chapel, 
a dark  building  of  raupo,  with  only  the  door  and  a small 
aperture  to  admit  the  light,  was  suddenly  illuminated ; we 
all  rushed  out,  and  saw  a splendid  meteor,  like  a drawn 
sword ; my  congregation  with  almost  one  voice  exclaimed, 
et  there  is  Satan  falling  from  heaven.”  The  ancient  image 
of  Tane  in  Tahaiti  was  represented  as  a meteor,  cone-shaped 
with  a large  head,  the  body  terminating  in  a point,  with  a 
long  tail,  the  form  evidently  taken  from  that  of  a meteor  or 
comet,  thus  proving  that  such  celestial  bodies  were  regarded 
as  visible  manifestations  of  deity. 

The  High  Chiefs,  or  Arikis,  as  well  as  the  Tohungas, 
were  thought  able,  at  all  times,  to  hold  visible  intercourse 
with  their  ancestors.  Their  gods  were  supposed  even  to  form 
attachments  with  females,  and  pay  them  repeated  visits ; a 
remarkable  instance  of  this  kind  fell  under  my  notice.  One 
morning  a native  came  with  a very  long  countenance,  and 
said,  the  Taupos  were  coming  to  fight  against  us,  to  put  an 
end  to  the  “ waka  pono,”  or  faith,  as  the  Christian  religion  is 
called.  I inquired  where  he  got  the  news  from ; he  told  me 
a female  named  Erina  had  seen  the  enemy ; and  upon 
further  questioning  him,  he  said  the  Atua,  who  was  in  love 
with  her,  had  showed  her  the  hostile  party;  I laughed  at 
him,  and  replied,  if  that  were  all  he  knew  about  the  Taupo 
enemy,  I should  not  have  much  fear,  I went,  however,  to 
the  woman,  and  told  her  I was  sorry  to  hear  she  had  been 
spreading  such  an  idle  tale ; she  said  it  was  not  her,  but  the 
spirit  who  came  to  her.  I inquired  how  did  he  inform  you 


150 


MYTHOLOGY. 


of  what  is  coming  to  pass ; she  said,  he  bid  me  hold  out  my 
hand,  and  put  a drop  of  blood  in  it,  telling  me  to  look 
attentively  into  it.  I did  so,  and  saw  Te  Heu-heu,  Here- 
kiekie  and  several  other  chiefs  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other 
the  church,  with  you  and  the  teachers  standing  before  it ; 
he  told  me  it  was  a taua , or  war,  against  the  church.  I 
said,  pray  what  form  did  the  spirit  appear  in  ? she  an- 
swered, he  came  as  a shadow.  I was  much  struck  with 
the  remembrance  of  this,  when  some  years  afterwards  I 
read  almost  a counterpart  of  it  in  Lane’s  Egypt.-  That 
an  ignorant  girl  should  hit  upon  so  close  a resemblance  was 
remarkable. 

The  Mata  Kite  or  seers  pretend  to  do  many  supernatural 
things,  and  cause  their  gods  to  appear  at  pleasure ; but 
from  my  personal  knowledge  of  many,  I am  persuaded  they 
are  ventriloquists,  and  thus  deceive  the  people,  although,  in 
some  cases,  they  may  deceive  themselves  with  the  idea  that 
the  god  is  in  them  ; generally,  however,  they  are  gross  im- 
postors, who  only  seek  gain  or  influence  by  their  pretended 
powers. 

A gentleman  who  resided  several  years  in  New  Zealand, 
and  travelled  a great  deal  amongst  the  natives,  had  once  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  this  pretended  powder  exercised  ; he 
was  in  company  with  two  young  natives,  one  a heathen 
chief  of  some  rank,  who  expressed  his  firm  belief,  not  only 
in  the  existence  of  their  gods,  but  likewise  in  their  willing- 
ness to  appear  to  their  own  relatives  when  asked  to  do  so ; 
he  was  told  that  he  could  not  believe  such  to  be  possible, 
unless  he  actually  saw  one  of  their  gods,  then  he  should  cease 
to  doubt  their  existence ; the  young  chief  immediately  offered 
to  give  the  proof  demanded;  and  invited  the  unbelieving 
European  to  accompany  him  to  an  old  lady,  who  formerly 
exercised  this  power  ; it  was  in  the  evening  when  the 
conversation  took  place  ; they  went  directly  to  her  abode ; 
she  was  in  a little  mahinga  or  cultivation  at  some  dis- 
tance from  the  village  ; they  found  her  sitting  in  a long 
shed  by  the  side  of  a fire  ; after  some  general  conversa- 
tion, the  young  chief  made  her  acquainted  with  the  object 


MYTHOLOGY. 


151 


of  their  visit,  telling  her  that  their  companion,  the  European, 
did  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  native  gods,  or  that  they 
could  hold  intercourse  with  men,  and  therefore  he  wished 
her  to  show  that  such  was  really  the  case,  by  giving  him 
an  actual  proof  of  it ; for  some  time  she  hesitated,  stating 
that  she  had  given  up  such  things,  and  had  become  a praying 
woman  ; at  last,  however,  after  much  entreaty,  she  consented, 
bidding  one  of  the  party  take  away  some  of  the  brands  from 
the  fire,  and  throw  them  outside,  as  the  gods  did  not  like 
too  much  light,  which  was  doubtless  very  true ; this  was 
accordingly  done  ; the  old  woman  sat  crouched  down  by 
the  fire,  with  her  head  concealed  in  her  blanket,  swaying  her 
body  to  and  fro  : the  young  chief  laid  himself  full  length  on 
the  ground,  with  his  face  downwards  and  began  by  calling 
on  the  different  gods  by  name,  who  were  considered  to  be 
his  relatives,  addressing  them  as  though  present ; his  being 
the  eldest  son  of  the  eldest  branch  of  his  family,  was  sup- 
posed to  confer  this  privilege  upon  him  ; at  first,  they 
appeared  to  pay  no  attention  to  their  relative,  he  therefore 
spoke  to  them  in  a louder  tone,  but  still  without  success ; at 
last,  he  called  to  them  in  an  angry  tone,  telling  them  if  they 
did  not  speak,  the  European  would  go  away  and  disbelieve 
in  their  existence ; the  old  womam  sat  still,  and  appeared 
to  take  no  notice  of  any  thing  ; the  European  kept  his 
eye  steadily  fixed  upon  her,  went  and  sat  by  her  side ; 
suddenly  he  heard  a scratching  as  of  a rat  running  up  the 
raupo,  and  along  the  roof  of  the  house,  until  the  sound 
seemed  to  come  from  the  spot  exactly  over  their  heads ; he 
thought  it  was  done  by  some  accomplice  outside,  but  he  was 
not  aware  of  any  one  being  there  besides  the  party  in  the 
house ; he  detected  no  movement  of  the  old  woman,  be- 
yond that  of  rocking  her  body  to  and  fro ; then  he  heard 
a low  whistle,  and  could  distinguish  the  inquiry,  what  did 
they  want  with  him  ? The  Maori  gods  always  speak  in  a 
whistling  tone ; the  young  chief  replied,  they  wanted  him 
to  come  and  shew  himself  to  the  European;  he  said  he 
should  kill  him  if  he  came,  the  chief  insisted  that  he  should 
render  himself  visible,  the  god  held  back,  but  the  chief 


152 


MYTHOLOGY. 


would  not  allow  his  divine  relative  to  escape ; at  last,  he 
consented  to  assume  the  form  of  a spider,  and  alight  on  his 
head ; the  European  said,  if  he  descended  straight  upon 
him,  he  would  believe  he  was  actually  present ; but  if  he 
only  saw  a spider  on  his  side  or  legs,  he  should  not  be  satis- 
fied : the  old  woman  then  got  up,  and  went  to  the  other 
side  of  the  hut,  and  fumbled  about  in  the  thatch  of  the  house, 
as  though  she  was  searching  for  a spider  to  act  the  god,  but 
her  search  was  vain,  she  only  found  a little  beetle,  which 
consumes  the  raupo ; she  then  came  and  sat  by  his  side, 
but  he  narrowly  watched  her  ; the  chief  reproached  the  god 
for  not  descending  at  once  upon  his  head ; the  god  replied 
it  was  from  an  unwillingness  to  injure  the  European ; the 
god  demanded  a blanket  for  having  spoken  to  him,  and  said 
he  had  seen  him  before  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  which  was 
false,  as  he  had  never  been  there ; but  he  assented,  to  see 
whether  the  god  might  not  tell  some  further  lies,  when  he 
found  that  the  first  was  agreed  to  ; he  then  imitated  the  Nga 
puhi  dialect,  and  said,  he  had  seen  such  and  such  chiefs  with 
him,  and  several  other  things  equally  untrue,  again  repeat- 
ing the  request  for  a present;  but  though  urged  to  render 
himself  visible,  he  obstinately  refused,  to  the  great  mor- 
tification of  the  chief,  who  still  believed  he  actually  heard  a 
god  speak,  thus  the  interview  terminated.  The  two  youths 
dared  not  return  to  the  pa  for  three  days  ; 1 asked  my 
informant  if  he  did  not  think  the  woman  was  a ventrilo- 
quist ? he  said  that  it  had  not  struck  him  before,  but  now 
he  felt  persuaded  she  was  ; he  knew  it  was  a deception, 
but  could  not  * find  it  out,  now  all  was  quite  clear.  He 
said  the  calling  of  the  young  chief  on  the  god,  reminded 
him  of  the  priests  of  Baal  calling  on  theirs.  In  the  case 
just  given,  it  is  evident  that  there  was  nothing  beyond 
what  a cunning  old  woman  might  say,  nothing  to  indicate 
any  superior  intelligence ; generally  these  ventriloquists  are 
distinguished  by  possessing  a greater  degree  of  shrewd- 
ness and  acquaintance  with  what  is  going  on,  than  their 
neighbours,  and  thus  sometimes  draw  conclusions,  which, 
though  natural,  being  beyond  their  perception,  when  time 


MYTHOLOGY. 


153 


verifies  them,  appear  prophetic,  and  indicative  of  super- 
natural power. 

Even  the  spirits  of  children  are  said  frequently  to  return 
as  gods,  and  heal  the  sick  who  come  to  them.  Some  years 
ago,  a child  named  Mati  was  said  to  have  thus  reappeared ; 
numbers  went  and  carried  their  sick  to  him ; he  always  told 
them  he  knew  what  was  the  matter  with  them — they  had  a 
lizard  in  them,  which  was  the  cause  of  the  disease ; or,  if 
the  person  was  very  bad,  he  would  say  he  had  two  or  more 
of  these  reptiles  in  him  ; and  if  extremely  ill,  that  he  had  a 
great  ruatara,  or  guana,  in  him ; this,  of  course,  was  very 
alarming  to  the  friends  of  the  sick,  who  would  immediately 
entreat  the  god  to  cast  it  out,  which  he  readily  engaged 
to  do,  although  sometimes  it  was  stipulated  beforehand 
what  remuneration  he  was  to  receive  : he  then  imitated  the 
squeaking  of  the  lizard,  and  told  the  parties  he  had  expelled 
the  reptile,  and  that  the  patient  would  now  speedily  recover. 
The  general  way  adopted  by  the  gods  of  communicating  with 
men  was  by  a whistle,  which  was  heard  on  the  roof  of  the 
house;  this  used  to  excite  great  fear  amongst  the  inmates. 
Ventriloquism  is  by  no  means  uncommon;  some  exercise 
this  power  to  enjoy  the  fears  it  excites.  A Catechist  allowed 
the  people  to  see  that  he  believed  their  gods  did  actually 
manifest  themselves  to  men,  and  the  natural  consequence 
was,  that  they  rewarded  him  with  several  displays  of  their 
presence  even  during  service.  The  common  term  for  these 
spiritual  manifestations  is,  Atua-kikokiko.  The  account  given 
of  the  witch  of  Endor  agrees  most  remarkably  with  those 
of  New  Zealand. 

Besides  gods,  the  natives  believed  in  the  existence  of  other 
beings,  who  lived  in  communities,  built  pas,  and  were  occu- 
pied with  similar  pursuits  to  those  of  men  ; these  were 
called  Patu-jpaearehe , their  chief  residences  were  on  the  tops 
of  lofty  hills,  and  they  are  said  to  have  been  the  spiritual 
occupants  of  the  country  prior  to  the  arrival  of  the  Maori, 
and  to  have  retired  as  they  advanced.  The  Wanganui  na- 
tives state,  that  when  they  first  came  to  reside  on  the  banks 
of  the  river,  almost  all  the  chief  heights  were  occupied  by‘r 


154 


MYTHOLOGY. 


the  Patu-paearehe,  who  gradually  abandoned  them,  and 
that  until  a few  generations  ago,  they  had  their  favorite 
haunts  there.  These  may  be  traditions  of  an  aboriginal  race 
mixed  with  fable,  and  there  are  several  things  to  warrant 
the  idea  that  the  Maori  were  not  the  first  inhabitants  of  the 
land. 

The  Patu-paearehe  were  only  seen  early  in  the  morning, 
and  are  represented  as  being  white,  and  clothed  in  white 
garments  of  the  same  form  and  texture  as  their  own ; in  fact, 
they  may  be  called  the  children  of  the  mist ; they  are  sup- 
posed to  have  been  of  large  size,  and  were  regarded  as  giants, 
although  in  some  respects  they  resembled  our  fairies ; they 
were  seldom  seen  alone,  but  generally  in  large  numbers ; 
were  loud  speakers,  and  delighted  in  playing  on  the 
putorino,  flute  ; nursed  their  children  in  their  arms,  as 
Europeans,  and  did  not  carry  them  in  the  Maori  style,  on 
the  back  or  hip ; their  faces  were  papatea,  not  tattooed, 
and  in  this  respect  also  resembled  Europeans ; they  held 
long  councils,  and  sang  very  loud ; were  often  seen  sitting 
in  cultivations,  which  were  completely  filled  with  them,  so 
as  to  be  frequently  mistaken  for  a war  party;  but  they  never 
injured  the  ground  ; the  only  harm  they  appear  to  have  been 
guilty  of,  was  that  of  entering  the  whare  puni,  or  hot-houses 
of  the  natives,  and  smiting  the  inmates,  so  that  for  a time 
they  appeared  to  be  dead  ; it  is  only  the  Mata  Kite  who  are 
now  able  to  discern  them ; these  quick-sighted  gentry  were 
not  aware  of  the  noxious  effects  of  the  fumes  of  charcoal, 
with  which  their  houses  were  heated. 

The  belief  in  the  Patu-paearehe  was  general;  many  de- 
clared they  had  repeatedly  met  with  them.  Albinos  are 
said  to  be  their  offspring,  they  are  accused  of  frequently 
surprising  women  in  the  bush,  but  the  following  is  an 
account  of  a man  being  caught  by  a Patu-paearehe  lady, 
which  is,  therefore,  very  interesting  : — 

Kurangai-tuku,  a Patu-paearehe,  was  a giantess  in  stature ; 
like  a tree  in  height,  her  fingers  and  nails  were  extremely 
long,  with  these  she  was  accustomed  to  spear  her  game,  which 
chiefly  consisted  of  pigeons  and  parrots;  one  day,  when  she 


MYTHOLOGY. 


155 


was  out  hunting,  she  came  to  a large  totara  tree,  in  which 
she  espied  a pigeon  sitting  ; she  immediately  sent  her  long 
nails  completely  through  the  trunk  ; a chief,  named  Hatupatu, 
was  also  out  spearing  birds  at  the  same  time;  he  saw  the 
pigeon  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  tree,  but  did  not  perceive 
the  lady  until  her  nails  appeared  through  it ; and  at  the  same 
time  she  saw  the  barb  of  his  spear,  which  had  likewise  pene- 
trated to  her  side,  she  looked  around  with  astonishment, 
and  perceived  Hatupatu,  it  was  the  first  time  she  had  ever 
seen  a man,  so  she  captured  him  alive,  and  carried  him  to  her 
house,  as  a mokai,  or  pet.  This  lady  appears  to  have  been 
a great  ornithologist,  her  house  being  a regular  aviary,  filled 
with  every  kind  of  bird,  which  she  tended  with  great  care ; 
amongst  these  she  placed  her  new  captive,  doubtless  con- 
sidering him  a very  valuable  addition  ; here  he  remained 
some  time,  until  he  began  to  be  weary  and  anxious  to 
escape,  he  was,  however,  treated  with  great  kindness,  and 
carefully  provided  for ; one  day  she  enquired  what  food 
he  would  like  to  have ; he  replied,  some  birds ; she  then 
demanded,  pae-hea  ? to  what  ridge  or  range  of  hills  was 
she  to  go  for  them  ? Was  she  to  go  to  the  first  ? He  said, 
no.  Was  she  to  go  to  the  second  ? He  replied,  still  further. 
She  continued  asking  him,  until  she  said  was  she  to  go 
to  the  sixth  range,  which  was  very  far  off ; he  said,  yes, 
in  order  that  he  might  have  sufficient  time  to  escape  whilst 
she  went  to  such  a distance.  Kurangai-tuku  did  not  much 
relish  so  long  a walk,  still  she  very  good-naturedly  set 
off,  and  rapidly  strode  from  pae  to  pae,  or  from  one 
range  to  another,  for  though  bare  foot,  yet  she  seemed  to 
possess  the  virtue  of  the  seven-leagued  boots.  Hatupatu 
in  the  meantime  stopped  up  all  the  holes  and  crevices 
of  the  house  with  flax,  that  none  of  the  birds  might 
escape  to  inform  their  mistress  of  his  departure;  but  he 
overlooked  one  very  little  hole.  When  he  crept  out  of  the 
house,  he  carefully  closed  the  door  after  him ; the  riro-riro, 
which  is  the  least  of  all  the  New  Zealand  birds,  perceived 
the  small  opening  which  had  been  left,  and  managed  to 
squeeze  her  little  body  through,  and  then  flew  straight  to 


156 


MYTHOLOGY. 


her  mistress,  exclaiming,  Kurangai  tuku,  Kurangai  tnku 
— e — ka  riro  a tana  hanga  ! riro,  riro,  riro  ! Our  property  is 
escaped,  it  is  gone,  gone,  gone  ! Hence  has  this  little  bird 
derived  its  name,  riro-riro.  She  at  once  returned,  and 
Kumea  Warona  stretching  out  her  legs  and  dragging  them 
onward,  was  soon  at  home,  snuffing  up  the  wind,  she 
quickly  found  the  direction  he  had  taken,  and  immediately 
set  off  in  pursuit,  soon  came  in  sight,  and  nearly  reached 
him,  whilst  he  was  approaching  a steep  cliff.  Now  Hatu- 
patu  was  the  youngest  son  of  his  mother,  and  to  make 
up  for  such  a great  disadvantage,  his  kind  and  considerate 
grandmother  bestowed  a very  powerful  charm  upon  him 
— he  had  not  a minute  to  spare — he  therefore  immediately 
put  it  to  the  test,  and  pronounced  the  potent  spell,  ma- 
titi,  mat  at  a,  open  and  cleave  asunder.  The  words  were  no 
sooner  uttered,  than  the  rock  obeyed;  it  at  once  opened 
and  received  him  within,  then  closed  up  again.  Kura- 
ngai-tuku  immediately  afterwards  reached  the  spot,  and 
was  strangely  puzzled  to  find  out  what  had  become  of 
Hatupatu,  she  began  scratching  about  with  her  long  nails 
on  the  rock,  exclaiming,  Ina  ano  koe,  e Hana,  Where 
have  you  got  to,  0 Hana,  which  was  short  for  his  name; 
if  you  ever  go  from  Rotorua  to  Tarawera,  and  ask  your 
guide,  he  will  show  you  the  marks  of  her  scratches,  which 
still  remain  on  the  face  of  the  rock,  several  inches  deep. 

When  Hatupatu  thought  she  had  gone  away,  he  came 
out  again  at  some  distance  from  the  spot  he  entered.  But 
she  was  too  sharp-sighted  to  miss  him ; again  was  she  in 
full  chase,  and  striding  along  would  have  overtaken  him, 
but  perceiving  his  danger,  he  again  uttered  the  power- 
ful words,  matitij  matata ; the  earth,  obedient  to  the  spell, 
opened  at  once  and  received  him  ; puzzled  at  his  strange 
disappearance,  she  scratched  about  and  cried,  Ina  ano 
koe  e Hana  ? Are  you  here,  Hana  ? After  some  time,  he 
once  more  ventured  from  his  hiding  place,  but  she  soon 
caught  sight  of  him,  and  pursued : he  cried  out  to  a tuft 
of  toe  toe,  matiti  matata,  or,  as  another  account  states, 
tatenga  tatanga  ; it  immediately  lifted  up  itself,  and  he 


MYTHOLOGY. 


157 


went  under,  thus  she  was  again  disappointed.  The  last 
time  he  entered  the  ground,  he  came  out  behind  Ohine 
motu,  near  a n gawk  a,  or  boiling  spring.  The  ground  around 
these  is  generally  formed  of  a very  thin  deposit  of  stone, 
which  arches  over  a large  portion  of  the  gulf,  and  poor 
Kurangai-tuku  stepping  upon  this,  being  too  weak  to  bear 
her  great  weight,  she  fell  in,  and  was  boiled.  The  name  of 
that  hot  spring  is  W aka-rewa-rewa. 

Besides  the  Patu-paearehe  were  the  Tua-riki* * * §  who  appear 
closely  to  have  resembled  them,  and  the  Maero , who  is 
described  as  a wild  man,  covered  with  hair,  having  long 
fingers  and  nails,  and  eating  his  food  raw.  He  lived  on 
inaccessible  mountains,  occasionally  made  a descent  and 
carried  off  any  he  could  capture,  j* 

There  was  also  the  Taring a-here,  a being  with  a face 
like  a cat ; and  another,  called  a Taijoo,  who  came  in  the 
night,  sat  on  the  tops  of  houses,  and  conversed  with  the 
inmates,  but  if  a woman  presumed  to  open  her  mouth,  it 
immediately  departed.  One  more  of  these  imaginary  crea- 
tures remains  to  be  noticed,  the  Taniwha}%  it  is  generally 
described  as  an  immense  fish,  sometimes  as  large  as  a whale, 
having  the  form  of  a lizard,  crocodile,  or  eel ; it  resided  in 
deep  water,  in  the  bends  of  rivers,  but  quite  as  frequently 
under  cliffs,  rocks,  and  mountains ; wherever  a quick  sand 
appeared  at  the  base  of  a cliff,  causing  land  slips,  there  was 
sure  to  be  a Taniwha  below.  § 

A story  is  told  of  a person  named  Tamamutu,  who  was 
sleeping  on  the  shore  of  the  island  Haka-e-pari,  in  Tara- 
wera  lake,  when  Te  lhi,  the  chief  of  the  Taupo  Taniwha, 

* This  word  is  short  for  Atua-ririki  (little  gods). 

f The  natives  say,  that  the  Tararua  range  is  now  his  only  habitation,  in  the 
northern  island,  where  he  is  still,  He  hapu  mariri,  a numerous  tribe,  and  that 
he  is  identical  with  the  Nga-ti-mamoe,  who  live  on  the  lofty  mountains  of  the 
middle  island. 

% Tan,  Tannin  Heb.  seems  to  be  the  root  of  this  word,  an  immense  Saurian. 
The  name  of  Tangaroa,  the  god  of  the  sea,  implies  that  he  was  either  a long 
sea  serpent  or  Saurian. 

§ The  land  slip  which  overwhelmed  Te  Heuheu  and  nearly  sixty  of  his  tribe 
was  supposed  to  have  been  thus  caused. 


158 


MYTHOLOGY. 


arose  out  of  it,  and  carried  him  away ; he  took  him  under 
water  to  the  bottom,  where  he  kept  him  several  days ; 
they  offered  him  some  of  their  food,  which  he  refused  to 
take,  well  knowing  if  he  had  touched  any  portion  he  could 
not  have  returned ; at  last,  a council  was  held,  whether 
they  should  kill  or  let  him  go  back  to  his  home ; the  latter 
opinion  prevailed,  and  he  was  carried  to  the  spot  from 
whence  he  had  been  taken  wh^re  he  was  found  asleep  by 
his  friends,  who  were  amazed  to  see  that  he  had  become 
perfectly  bald — not  a hair  being  left  on  any  part  of  his  body.* 
He  described  the  Taniwha  as  great  Ngarara  or  lizards.  This 
Ihi,  the  grand  head  of  the  Taupo  Taniwha,  is  stated  tradi- 
tionally to  have  been  a man  who  one  day  when  paddling 
with  another  in  a canoe,  on  the  Taupo  lake,  suddenly  leaped 
into  the,  water,  dived  down  and  disappeared ; he  was  thought 
to  be  drowned;  but  some  time  afterwards,  he  made  his 
appearance  at  Rotorua ; the  token  of  his  coming  up  was  a 
boiling  of  the  water,  producing  great  waves.  His  mother, 
Te-Ara-tuku-tuku,  was  the  great  progenitor  of  all  the 
Taniwhas  ; at  her  death,  four  pas  were  swallowed  up  in 
Taupo  ; the  names  of  two  of  them  were  Kohuru  Kareao, 
and  Waka  Ohoka.  The  death  of  Pipiri,  a chief  priest  of 
Motutere,  was  foretold  by  Ara-tuku-tuku,  because  he  went 
to  fish  whilst  she  was  engaged  in  prayer,  she  said  that  his 
canoe  would  therefore  be  lost,  which  came  to  pass ; the 
natives,  in  revenge,  killed  her,  and  then  the  four  pas  were 
swallowed  up ; the  land  where  they  stood  became  deep 
water,  as  well  as  the  spot  where  she  was  buried. 

Once  there  was  a formidable  reptile  of  this  kind  at  Ora- 
waro,  near  Pakerau,  named  Taraka  piri-piri  ; he  was  of 
enormous  length  and  size,  and  swallowed  two  children  at 
a meal,  with  their  green  stone  ornaments.  On  one  occasion, 
as  a woman  was  passing  near  his  den,  he  suddenly  crawled 
out  and  seized  her,  compelling  her  to  become  his  wife ; and 
lest  she  should  run  away  kept  her  tied  with  a rope;  she 

* A chief  stated  to  me  that  he  received  a similar  account  from  the  lips  of 
Tamamutu  himself. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


159 


naturally  became  afraid  of  such  a husband,  and  hit  upon  the 
following  expedient  to  effect  her  escape  : — complaining  of 
great  thirst,  she  induced  him  to  let  her  go  to  the  water,  but 
the  wary  monster  still  kept  her  tied  with  the  rope  ; to  make 
him  think  that  she  had  no  desire  to  escape,  she  left  her  girdle 
with  him  : he  was  thus  deceived  ; when  she  reached  the 
water,  she  tied  the  rope  to  a tree,  and  ran  off  to  her  home, 
when  the  Taniwha  thought  she  had  stayed  long  enough  to 
quench  her  thirst,  he  pulled  the  rope,  and  was  amazed  at  the 
resistance ; thinking  she  was  very  strong  and  obstinate,  he 
went  out  of  his  cave  to  see  the  cause,  and  then  found  out  the 
trick  which  had  been  played  off  upon  him.  The  woman  went 
and  told  all  her  friends  and  relatives,  and  further  suggested, 
that  the  best  way  of  killing  the  monster,  would  be  by  a poa 
poa,  or  live  bait.  Fifty  persons,  therefore,  immediately  armed 
themselves  with  sharp  kos  or  spades,  determined  to  kill  him, 
or  perish  in  the  attempt.  When  they  reached  his  abode  they 
all  went  behind  it,  and  there  laid  in  ambush,  sending  only 
one  of  their  number  in  front,  as  the  poa  poa ; when  Tara- 
ka-piri-piri  saw  him,  he  came  out  a little  way  from  his  den ; 
the  man  stepped  forward  a few  paces,  until  he  had  succeeded 
in  drawing  him  completely  out;  the  fifty  men  then  rushed 
at  once  upon  him,  and  soon  dispatched  him,  thrusting  their 
sharp  kos  into  his  body ; they  cut  him  open,  and  found  all 
the  green  stone  ornaments  of  the  poor  children  in  his 
stomach,  and  the  womans  girdle  in  the  cave. 

In  fact,  at  one  period  New  Zealand  appears  to  have  been 
as  dreadfully  plagued  with  Ngarara  and  Taniwhas,  as 
Europe  was  once  with  dragons ; and  had  it  not  been  for  a 
race  of  heroes  who  patriotically  devoted  themselves,  like  St. 
George  of  old,  to  the  work  of  freeing  their  country  from  such 
fearful  pests,  there  is  no  saying  what  would  have  become  of 
it;  it  certainly  would  have  been  anything  but  a desirable 
field  for  colonization.  At  Wanganui,  there  was  a dreadful 
monster,  who  lived  below  the  cliff,  at  Taumahauti,  called 
Tutai-poro-poro ; he  was  at  last  killed  by  Aukehu,  whose 
canoe  with  all  his  party  had  been  swallowed  up  by  the 
monster,  but  fortunately  Aukehu  himself,  being  last,  made 


160 


MYTHOLOGY. 


Lis  escape  by  slipping  out  at  the  stern  as  it  went  down  his 
throat ; he  then  cut  into  his  belly  with  his  mira  tuatini,  a 
knife  made  of  shark’s  teeth,  and  let  in  the  water  which  killed 
him.  This  monster  originally  came  from  Rotoaira  to  Reta- 
ruki  and  thence  down  the  Wanganui. 

At  Kapenga,  on  the  Kainga-roa  plains,  there  formerly 
lived  a Taniwha,  named  Hotu-puku.  After  having  devoured 
great  numbers  of  people,  he  was  at  last  destroyed  by  a party 
of  brave  men  from  Rotorua;  who  made  strong  ropes,  and 
formed  a large  circular  snare  with  them ; stationing  a party 
at  each  end,  and  sending  others  to  entice  the  monster  out 
of  his  den,  as  soon  as  he  scented  the  men,  he  came  out  and 
pursued  them  ; they  retreated  through  the  snare,  the  monster 
followed,  and  when  the  two  parties  who  were  laid  in  ambush 
on  either  side  of  the  road,  saw  that  his  head  and  shoulders 
had  entered,  they  immediately  pulled  the  ropes  tight ; the 
monster  struggled  very  hard,  they  therefore  drove  strong 
stakes  into  the  ground  to  which  they  made  fast  the  ropes, 
when  the  entire  party  united  and  attacked  the  Taniwha,  and 
at  last  despatched  him.  He  was  of  enormous  size,  being  de- 
scribed by  the  Maori  narrator  as  “ he  puke  puke  whenua  ” 
a mountain,  and  when  he  was  dead  he  looked  like  a great 
whale,  but  covered  with  scales,  and  large  spikes  on  his  back. 
When  opened,  they  found  the  remains  of  great  numbers  of 
persons,  with  weapons,  green  stone  ornaments  of  all  kinds, 
so  that  his  stomach  resembled  te  whare  huata  a Maui — the 
armoury  of  Maui. 

The  same  party,  justly  celebrated  by  this  exploit,  were 
immediately  sent  for  to  destroy  another  great  Taniwha,  who 
resided  at  the  bottom  of  a deep  fountain,  called  te  wharo 
uri : when  they  reached  the  banks  of  the  river,  they  repeated 
all  their  most  potent  incantations,  the  puni,  the  whakaruhi, 
the  wero-wero-Taniwha,  the  wakapuru  to  tumangai,  the 
whanga-whangai,  the  whakautu-utu,  and  many  others ; they 
made  a taiki,  a large  cone-shaped  basket,  in  which  they 
dive  to  the  bottom  of  lakes  to  catch  cray  and  other  shell  fish, 
one  bold  chief  named  Pitaka,  with  his  comrade,  volunteered 
to  descend  into  the  abyss,  and  pass  a rope  round  the  monster. 


MYTHOLOGY. 


161 


Whilst  in  the  water,  the  party  above  kept  repeating  all  their 
spells,  to  weaken  the  Taniwha  and  strengthen  the  divers ; 
the  monster,  immediately  he  saw  them,  elevated  the  spines 
on  his  back  with  delight,  at  the  prospect  of  such  a feast,  but 
Pitaka  and  his  friend,  nothing  daunted,  at  once  passed  a 
rope  round  him,  and  then  gave  a signal  to  be  drawn  up. 
The  party  above  by  a strong  pull,  brought  both  the  men 
and  Taniwa  up  together,  a thing  which  would  have  been 
impossible  for  them  to  have  done  on  account  of  the  enormous 
weight  of  the  monster,  but  for  the  power  of  the  spells  used ; 
they  then  killed  and  eat  him;  four  hundred  and  fifty  men 
were  engaged  in  this  exploit ; they  found  bodies,  mats,  &c., 
in  his  stomach,  the  same  as  in  the  others.  His  name  was 
Pekehaua,  when  his  ribs  were  bare  of  flesh  they  looked 
Ano  te  riu  o Tane  mahuta , like  the  hollow  trunk  of  Tane 
mahuta. 

Another  Taniwa,  named  Katorore , was  also  killed  by  the 
same  party,  and  thus  that  district  became  freed  from  those 
fearful  reptiles.* 

Such  arO  the  supernatural  beings  who  were  thought  by 
the  natives  to  have  existence.  In  every  place  there  were 
objects  which  were  viewed  with  reverence,  as  being  the 
peculiar  abode  of  certain  spirits  : rocks,  stones,  trees,  rivers, 
fountains,  even  large  eels  were  reverenced,  prayed  to,  and 
had  daily  offerings  made  them  : the  sacred  trees  were  known 
by  their  being  daubed  over  with  red  ochre,  and  having  rags 
tied  round  them,  like  the  fetish  trees  of  Africa,  each  visitor 
leaving  one  as  he  passed  by. 

A solitary  Turkey  cock  by  some  means  or  other  found  Lis 
way  to  a small  isle  in  one  of  the  lakes,  adjoining  Rotorua, 
most  probably  having  escaped  from  the  mission  station  at 
the  Ngae.  This  bird  managed  to  acquire  a kind  of  sanctity 
amongst  the  remaining  heathen  of  the  district,  who  never 
paddled  past  poor  gobbles  isle,  without  leaving  him  a 
present,  and  thus,  though  doomed  to  a life  of  celibacy,  he 
still  grew  fat  on  the  offerings  of  his  admirers.  But  now 

* Sir  G.  Grey’s  Overland  Expedition  to  Taupo. 

M 


162 


MYTHOLOGY, 


this  and  other  heathen  fancies  are  rapidly  being  forgotten. 
The  ancient  abodes  and  haunts  of  Taniwas,  Patu-paearehe- 
Maero's,  &c are  still  pointed  out,  but  their  inhabitants  have 
long  since  disappeared. 


A TAPUED  CHIEF  EATING  WITH  A iFERN  STALK. 


CHAPTER  VJLII. 

T APU. 


This  singular  Institution,  which  pervaded  the  entire  extent 
of  Polynesia,  may  perhaps  be  most  correctly  defined  as  a 
religious  observance,  established  for  political  purposes  ; it 
consisted  in  making  any  person,  place,  or  thing  sacred  for  a 
longer  or  shorter  period  ; if  it  were  a person,  during  the 
time  of  the  Tapu,  he  could  not  be  touched  by  any  one, 
or  even  put  his  own  hand  to  his  head ; but  he  was  either 
fed  by  another  who  was  appointed  for  the  purpose,  or  took 
up  his  food  with  his  mouth  from  a small  stage,  with  his 
hands  behind  him,  or  by  a fern  stalk,  and  thus  conveyed  it 
to  his  mouth ; in  drinking,  the  water  was  poured  in  a very 
expert  manner  from  a calabash  into  his  mouth,  or  on  his 
hands,  when  he  needed  it  for  washing,  so  that  he  should  not 
touch  the  vessel,  which  otherwise  could  not  have  been  used 
again  for  ordinary  purposes.* 

During  the  war  in  the  north  a chief  named  Kanara  was 

* A similar  custom  prevailed  in  Israel — see  2 Kings  iii 11. 

M 2 


164 


TAPU. 


severely  wounded.  I attended  and  bound  up  his  wounds ; 
my  hands  were  covered  with  his  blood,  they  would  not  allow 
me  to  go  to  the  stream  and  wash,  or  use  a calabash  of  water 
which  stood  near,  but  one  of  the  attendants  poured  water 
from  it  upon  my  hands  without  permitting  me  to  touch  it, 
lest  it  should  be  made  tapu ; the  bloody  rags  also  were  care- 
fully carried  to  a wahi  tapu  and  there  deposited. 

Places  were  tapu  for  certain  periods ; rivers  until  the  fishing 
was  ended;  cultivations  until  the  planting  or  reaping  was 
completed  ; districts  until  either  the  hunting  of  the  rat  or 
catching  of  birds  was  done ; woods  until  the  fruit  of  the  kie- 
kie  was  gathered.  The  tapu  may  be  considered  as  having 
been  of  two  kinds,  private  and  public;  the  one  affecting 
individuals,  the  other  communities.  A person  became  tapu 
by  touching  a dead  body,  or,  by  being  very  ill ; in  this  re- 
spect it  appears  to  bear  a close  resemblance  to  the  Mosaic 
law  relating  to  uncleanness. 

The  garments  of  an  ariki,  or  high  chief,  were  tapu,  as 
well  as  everything  relating  to  him  ; they  could  not  be  worn 
by  any  one  else,  lest  they  should  kill  him.  An  old  chief  in 
my  company  threw  away  a very  good  mat  because  it  was 
too  heavy  to  carry,  he  cast  it  down  a precipice,  when  I in- 
quired why  he  did  not  leave  it  suspended  on  a tree,  that 
any  future  traveller  wanting  a garment  might  take  it  ? He 
gravely  told  me  that  it  was  the  fear  of  its  being  taken  by 
another,  which  had  caused  him  to  throw  it  where  he  did,  for 
if  it  were  worn,  his  tapu  would  kill  the  person.  In  the  same 
way,  Taunuf’s  tinder  box,  which  he  lost,  killed  several 
who  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  find  it,  and  light  their 
pipes  from  it,  without  knowing  it  belonged  to  so  sacred  an 
owner;  they  actually  died  from  fright.  If  the  blood  of  a 
high  chief  flows  on  anything,  though  it  be  a single  drop,  it 
renders  that  tapu  ; a party  of  natives  came  to  see  Te  Heuheu, 
the  great  chief  of  Taupo,  in  a fine  large  new  canoe ; Te 
Heuheu  got  into  it  to  go  a short  distance,  in  doing  so  he 
struck  a splinter  in  his  foot,  the  blood  flowed  from  the 
wound  into  the  canoe,  which  at  once  tapued  it  to  him ; the 
owner  immediately  jumped  out,  and  dragged  it  on  shore. 


TAPU. 


165 


opposite  the  chief’s  house,  and  there  left  it ; a gentleman 
entering  my  house,  knocked  his  head  against  a beam,  which 
made  the  blood  flow,  the  natives  present  said,  in  former 
times  the  house  would  have  belonged  to  that  individual.  To 
draw  blood,  even  from  a scratch,  was  a very  serious  mat- 
ter, and  often  attended  with  fatal  consequences  ; a thief 
caught  in  plundering,  though  liable  to 'be  killed  for  the  act, 
still,  if  merely  struck  with  a stick  so  as  to  cause  a single 
drop  of  blood  to  flow,  by  that  circumstance  became  at  once 
the  aggrieved  party  and  could  claim  the  karaka  grove  or 
kumara  ground  where  the  theft  was  committed,  as  a satisfac- 
tion for  the  injury  he  had  sustained. 

A chief’s  house  was  tapu,  no  person  could  eat  therein,  or 
even  light  his  pipe  from  the  fire ; and  until  a certain  service 
had  been  gone  through,  even  a woman  could  not  enter ; the 
chief  being  sacred,  had  his  food  to  himself,  generally  in  his 
verandah,  or  apart  from  the  rest.  No  chief  could  carry  food, 
lest  it  should  occasion  his  death,  by  destroying  his  tapu,  or 
lest  a slave  should  eat  of  it,  and  so  cause  him  to  die.  A chief 
would  not  pass  under  a wata,  or  food  store.  The  head  of 
the  chief  was  the  most  sacred  part  of  the  body ; if  he  only 
touched  it  with  his  fingers,  he  was  obliged  immediately  to 
apply  them  to  his  nose,  and  snuff  up  the  sanctity  which  they 
had  acquired  by  the  touch,  and  thus  restore  it  to  the  part 
from  whence  it  was  taken  ; for  the  same  reason  a chief 
could  not  blow  the  fire  with  his  mouth,  for  the  breath  being 
sacred,  communicated  his  sanctity  to  it,  and  a brand  might 
be  taken  by  a slave,  or  a man  of  another  tribe,  or  the  fire 
might  be  used  for  other  purposes,  such  as  cooking,  and  so 
cause  his  death.  The  chief  power,  however  of  this  insti- 
tution was  principally  seen  in  its  effects  on  the  multitude. 

In  former  times,  life  in  a great  measure  depended  upon 
the  produce  of  their  cultivations,  it  was  therefore  of  the 
utmost  importance  that  their  kumara  and  taro,  should 
be  planted  at  the  proper  season,  and  every  other  occupa- 
tion be  laid  aside  until  that  necessary  work  was  accom- 
plished : all,  therefore,  who  were  thus  employed,  were  made 
tapu ; so  that  they  could  not  leave  the  place,  or  undertake 


166 


TAPU. 


any  other  work,  until  that  was  finished ; so  also  in  fishing 
and  hunting  ; this  applied  not  only  to  those  thus  employed, 
but  to  others  as  well,  the  kumara  grounds  were  tapu,  no 
strange  natives  could  approach  them.  Even  the  people  of 
the  place,  if  not  engaged  in  the  work,  were  obliged  to 
stand  at  a distance  from  the  ground  thus  rendered  sacred 
by  solemn  karakia doubtless  this  was  a wise  precaution 
to  avoid  interruptions,  and  keep  them  from  stealing ; no 
one  but  the  priest  could  pass  in  front  of  the  party  engaged 
in  gathering  in  the  kumara,  those  who  presumed  to  do 
so,  would  be  either  killed  or  stripped  for  their  temerity. 
The  woods  in  which  they  hunted  the  rat  were  tapu,  until  the 
sport  was  over,  and  so  were  the  rivers,  no  canoe  could  pass 
by  until  the  rahue  was  taken  down. 

In  the  early  days  of  the  Mission,  the  tapu  was  a great 
annoyance,  its  members  were  often  unable  to  communi- 
cate with  each  other,  until  the  dreaded  pole  was  removed, 
but  at  last  they  determined  to  observe  the  tapu  no  longer ; 
their  boat  was  manned,  and  they  rowed  along  in  defiance 
of  the  sacred  prohibition  ; they  had  not  gone  far,  how- 
ever, before  they  were  pursued,  the  boat  was  dragged 
ashore,  and  all  the  articles  in  it  seized,  amongst  which  were 
some  bottles  of  medicine  and  pots  of  preserves  ; these  were 
immediately  eaten,  and  great  wrath  and  indignation  ex- 
pressed ; but  by  preserving  a firm  deportment,  the  natives 
were  conquered ; the  medicine  perhaps  had  its  share  in  ob- 
taining the  victory,  as  they  found  they  could  not  meddle 
with  Europeans  with  impunity ; they  held  a meeting,  it 
was  then  resolved,  that  for  the  future,  as  Europeans  were 
a foreign  race,  and  subject  to  a different  religion,  the  tapu 
should  not  apply  to  them ; afterwards,  as  their  converts  in- 
creased, the  permission  was  enlarged  to  take  them  in  as 
well ; finally,  the  tapu  became  disregarded  by  all,  and  fell 
into  disuse. 

Those  who  were  tapued  for  any  work,  could  not  mix  again 
in  society  until  it  was  taken  off,  or  they  were  waka  noa} 
made  common,  and  deprived  of  the  sanctity  with  which  they 
had  been  invested.  This  was  done  by  the  priest,  who  re- 


TAPU. 


167 


peated  a long  karakia,  and  performed  certain  rites  over 
them.  If  any  one  wished  to  preserve  his  crop,  house,  gar- 
ments, or  anything  else,  he  made  them  tapu ; a tree  which 
had  been  selected  in  the  forest  for  a canoe,  a patch  of  raupo 
in  a swamp,  which  an  individual  might  wish  to  appropriate 
to  himself,  and  which  he  could  not  then  conveniently  do, 
was  rendered  tapu  to  him  by  tying  a band  round  the  former, 
with  a little  grass  in  it,  or  sticking  up  a pole  in  the  latter 
with  a similar  bunch  attached. 

If  a person  had  been  taken  prisoner  in  war,  and  a feel- 
ing of  pity  arose  in  the  breast  of  one  of  his  captors,  though 
it  may  have  been  the  general  determination  to  put  him  to 
death,  the  desire  of  the  merciful  individual  would  prevail, 
by  throwing  his  garment  over  him ; he  who  then  touched 
the  prisoner  with  a hostile  intention  touched  also  his  pre- 
server. An  instance  of  this  kind  occurred  during  the 
late  war  at  Wanganui  : one  of  the  inhabitants  was  cap- 
tured by  the  hostile  natives,  he  was  on  the  point  of  being 
put  to  death,  as  a return  in  kind  for  our  own  narrow  and 
barbarous  policy  to  a native  prisoner  who  was  hung  at  Pori- 
rua,  when  an  old  chief  rushed  forward,  and  threw  his  blanket 
over  him,  the  man  was  spared,  and  afterwards  treated  with 
great  kindness,  as  though  he  were  one  of  the  tribe. 

Formerly  every  woman  was  noa,  or  common,  and  could 
select  as  many  companions  as  she  liked,  without  being 
thought  guilty  of  any  impropriety,  until  given  away  by  her 
friends  to  some  one  as  her  future  master ; she  then  became 
tapu  to  him,  and  was  liable  to  be  put  to  death  if  found 
unfaithful. 

A woman  of  rank  would  frequently  be  allowed  to  live  with 
a slave  for  a time,  without  being  considered  as  belonging  to 
him  longer  than  she  might  feel  disposed  to  remain,  or  until 
her  friends  might  dispose  of  her  to  one  of  suitable  rank.  Te 
Heuheu  allowed  his  young  daughter  to  live  with  a common 
Pakeka  who  was  tramping  about,  in  order  that  he  might  be 
said  to  have  an  European  belonging  to  him ; the  chiefs  of 
his  tribe  said  they  should  soon  take  her  away,  and  bestow 
her  in  marriage  on  a young  man  of  rank,  When  this  liason 


168 


TAPIT. 


was  formed  against  the  father’s  wish,  and  there  was  offspring, 
the  grandfather  frequently  destroyed  it ; a chief  of  Rotoaira 
thus  put  to  death  the  illegitimate  child  of  his  daughter  by 
cruelly  tying  it  up  in  a basket  to  one  of  the  rafters  of  his 
house,  and  there  leaving  it  to  perish ; the  mother,  ill  from 
its  loss,  came  to  me  for  medicine,  but  did  not  seem  to  grieve 
for  her  infant’s  death. 

The  power  of  the  tapu,  however,  mainly  depended  on  the 
influence  of  the  individual  who  imposed  it.  If  it  were  put  on 
by  a great  chief,  it  would  not  be  broken,  but  a powerful  man 
often  broke  through  the  tapu  of  an  inferior.  A chief  would 
frequently  lay  it  on  a road  or  river,  so  that  no  one  could  go  by 
either,  unless  he  felt  himself  strong  enough  to  set  the  other 
at  defiance.  The  duration  of  the  tapu  was  arbitrary,  and  de- 
pended on  the  will  of  the  person  who  imposed  it ; also  the 
extent  to  which  it  applied.  Sometimes  it  was  limited  to  a par- 
ticular object,  at  other  times  it  embraced  many ; sometimes  it 
was  laid  on  one  spot,  at  other  times  on  an  entire  district.  Some 
persons  and  places  were  always  tapu,  as  an  .ariki  or  tohunga 
and  their  houses,  so  much  so,  that  even  their  owners  could 
not  eat  in  them ; therefore  all  their  meals  were  taken  in  the 
open  air.  The  males  could  not  eat  with  their  wives,  nor  their 
wives  with  the  male  children,  lest  their  tapu  or  sanctity  should 
kill  them.  The  women  generally  took  their  meals  by  the  side 
of  the  ovens.  If  a chief  took  a fancy  for  anything  belonging 
to  another  who  was  inferior,  he  made  it  tapu  for  himself,  by 
calling  it  his  backbone  : and  thus  put,  as  it  were,  his  broad 
arrow  upon  it.  A chief  anxious  to  obtain  a fine  large  canoe 
belonging  to  an  inferior  who  had  offended  him,  merely  called 
it  by  his  own  name,  and  then  his  people  went  and  took 
it.  If  a chief  wished  to  hinder  a person  from  going  to  any 
place,  or  by  a particular  road,  he  made  it  tapu.  During  the 
disturbances  between  the  Government  and  the  natives,  they 
tapued  the  sea  shore,  would  not  permit  any  Europeans  to 
travel  that  way,  and  compelled  some  of  the  highest  func- 
tionaries to  retrace  their  steps. 

Some  years  ago,  a German  missionary  located  himself  at 
Motu  Karamu,  a pa  up  the  Mokau ; the  greater  part  of  the 


TAPU. 


169 


natives  there*  with  their  head  chief  Te  Kuri*  were  members 
of  the  Church  of  Rome  ; but  his  head  wife  became  his  warm 
patron.  When  the  priest  arrived  there  on  his  way  down  the 
river*  he  scolded  Te  Kuri  for  suffering  a heretical  missionary 
to  be  located  in  his  district*  applying  many  opprobrious 
epithets  to  the  intruder ; this  very  much  incensed  the 
chiefs  lady ; she  said  her  teacher  should  not  be  abused*  and 
therefore  next  morning*  when  his  reverence  was  preparing 
to  continue  his  journey*  she  made  the  river  tapu*  and  to  his 
annoyance  there  was  not  a canoe  to  be  found  which  dare 
break  it;  after  storming  for  some  time  he  was  obliged  to 
return  by  the  way  he  came*  the  lady  saying  it  would  teach  him 
better  manners  another  time*  and  not  insult  her  minister. 

To  render  a place  tapu*  the  chief  tied  one  of  his  old  gar- 
ments to  a pole*  and  stuck  it  up  on  the  spot  intended  to  be 
made  sacred,  this  he  either  called  by  his  own  name*  saying 
it  was  some  part  of  his  body*  as  Te  Heuheu  made  the 
mountain  Tongariro  sacred*  by  speaking  of  it  as  his  back- 
bone* or  he  gave  it  the  name  of  one  of  his  ancestors*  then 
all  descended  from  that  individual  were  bound  to  see  the 
tapu  maintained*  the  further  back  the  ancestors  went*  the 
greater  number  of  persons  interested  in  keeping  it  up* 
as  the  credit  and  influence  of  the  family  were  at  stake* 
and  all  were  bound  to  revenge  any  infringement  of  it. 
Words  were  also  rendered  tapu*  and  could  not  afterwards  be 
used  on  any  account.  A chief  of  Rotorua  was  called  Imi  or 
food  when  he  died,  the  word  was  made  tapu*  and  although 
the  most  common  one  another  was  substituted : to  use  the 
former  there*  would  have  been  equivalent  to  a curse. 
Graves  and  wahi  tapu  were  always  sacred*  and  no  one  ever 
thought  of  entering  them*  to  do  so  was  attended  with  danger. 
Governor  Philip  introduced  a large  breed  of  pigs  into  the 
island*  but  highly  as  those  new  animals  were  prized*  when 
they  sacrilegiously  presumed  to  root  in  their  wahi  tapus* 
they  were  exterminated  for  their  impiety. 

Another  kind  of  tapu  was  that  which  was  acquired  by  acci- 
dental circumstances*  thus* — An  iron  pot*  which  was  used 
for  cooking  purposes*  was  lent  to  an  European;  he  very 


170 


TAPU. 


innocently  placed  it  under  the  eaves  of  his  house,  to  catch 
water ; the  rain  coming  from  a sacred  dwelling,  rendered  the 
utensil  so  likewise ; it  was  afterwards  removed  by  a person 
to  cook  with,  without  her  knowing  what  had  been  done ; 
when  she  was  told  it  had  caught  water  from  the  roof,  she 
exclaimed,  We  shall  all  die  before  night;  they  went,  how- 
ever, to  the  tohunga,  who  made  it  noa  again  by  uttering 
the  Tupeke  over  it,  and  so  averted  the  evil.* 

Sickness  also  made  the  person  tapu ; all  diseases  were  sup- 
posed to  be  occasioned  by  atuas  entering  the  body  of  the 
afflicted;  these,  therefore,  rendered  the  person  sacred.  The 
sick  were  removed  from  their  own  houses,  and  had  sheds  built 
for  them  in  the  bush,  at  a considerable  distance  from  the  pa, 
where  they  lived  apart ; if  any  remained  in  their  houses  and 
died  there,  they  became  tapu,  were  painted  over  with  red 
ochre,  and  could  not  again  be  used,  which  often  put  a tribe  to 
great  inconvenience,  as  some  houses  were  the  common  abode 
of  perhaps  thirty  or  forty  per  sons,  f The  wife  of  a chief  was 
very  ill,  I therefore  took  her  into  my  little  hospital,  where 
she  laid  for  several  days ; at  last,  her  husband  came  and 
carried  her  away,  saying  he  was  afraid  of  her  dying  there, 
lest  the  house  should  be  made  tapu  and  thus  hinder  me 
from  using  it  again.  During  the  war,  Maketu,  a principal 
chief  of  the  hostile  natives,  was  shot  in  a house  belonging 
to  a settler,  which  he  was  then  plundering ; from  that  time 
it  became  tapu,  and  no  heathen  would  enter  it  for  years. 

The  resting  places  of  great  chiefs  on  a journey  became 
tapu  ; if  they  were  in  the  forest,  the  spots  were  cleared,  and 
surrounded  with  a fence  of  basket  work,  and  names  were 


* The  following  is  a Tupeke  : 

A ko  te  puru,  ko  te  puru,  koa,  The  dancing,  the  dancing  of  the  legs, 

the  striving  the  striving,  that  anger 
may  be  done  away, 
the  anger  cannot  reach, 
lest  the  stomach  be  pierced 
stand  firm  like  the  comorant 
and  anger  departs. — Maori  Gazette. 


a tohe  tohe  ki  aue  ue 

kia  tu  tanga  tangai  te  riri 
e kore  te  riri  e tae  mai 
ki  kai  wara  kopu 
Kawautia  ko  ahaaha  te  riri 


f This,  perhaps,  may  be  the  excuse  of  those  heathen  natives,  who  expose 
and  abandon  their  sick  ; it  is  also  something  like  the  law  of  the  leper. 


TAPU. 


171 


given  them.  This  custom  particularly  applied  to  remark- 
able rocks  or  trees,  to  which  karakia  was  made,  a little 
bundle  of  rushes  was  thrown  as  an  offering  to  the  spirit  who 
was  supposed  to  reside  there,*  and  the  sacred  object  was 
smeared  over  with  red  ochre.  A similar  custom  prevailed 
when  corpses  were  carried  to  their  final  place  of  interment. 
The  friends  of  the  dead  either  carved  an  image,  which  they 
frequently  clothed  with  their  best  garments,  or  tied  some  of 
those  of  the  dead  to  a neighbouring  tree,  or  pole,  or  else 
painted  some  adjacent  rock  or  stone,  with  red  ochre,  to 
which  they  gave  the  name  of  the  dead  ; and  whenever  they 
passed  by,  addressed  it  as  though  their  friends  were  alive 
and  present,  using  the  most  endearing  expressions  and  cast- 
ing some  fresh  garments  on  the  figure,  as  a token  of  their 
love.  These  were  a kind  of  memorial  idols.  If  a corpse  was 
conveyed  in  a canoe  it  was  never  afterwards  used,  but 
painted  red  and  drawn  on  shore. 

An  inferior  kind  of  tapu  exists,  which  any  one  may  use ; 
a person  who  finds  a piece  of  drift  timber,  secures  it  for 
himself  by  tying  something  round  it,  or  giving  it  a chop 
with  his  axe ; in  a similar  way  he  can  appropriate  to  his 
own  use  whatever  is  naturally  common  to  all.  A person 
may  thus  stop  up  a road  through  his  ground,  and  often  leaves 
his  property  in  exposed  places,  with  merely  this  simple  tohu 
or  sign,  to  show  it  is  private,  and  it  is  allowed  to  remain 
untouched,  however  many  may  pass  that  way ; so  with  a 
simple  bit  of  flax  a man  secured  the  door  of  his  house, 
containing  all  his  valuables,  or  his  food  store,  they  were  thus 
rendered  inviolable  and  no  one  would  meddle  with  them. 
The  owner  of  a wood  abounding  with  the  kie  kie,  a much 
prized  fruit,  is  accustomed  to  set  up  a pole  to  preserve  it 
until  the  fruit  be  fully  ripe ; when  it  is  thought  to  be  suffici- 


* Ka  u ki  mata  nuku, 

Ka  u ki  mata  rangi, 
Ka  u ki  o whenua, 

He  whenua  he  tauhou, 
Hei  kai  mau, 

Te  ate  o te  tauhou, 


Arrived  at  slippery  point, 
Arrived  at  break  of  day, 
Arrived  here  O earth, 

The  earth  a stranger, 

As  food  for  thee, 

The  shadow  of  the  stranger. 


172 


TAPU. 


ently  so,  lie  sends  a young  man  to  see  if  the  report  be  favor- 
able, the  rahue  is  then  pulled  down ; this  removes  the  tapu, 
and  the  entire  population  go  to  “ takahi”  or  trample  the 
wood ; all  have  liberty  to  gather  the  fruit,  but  it  is  cus- 
tomary to  present  some  of  the 'finest  to  the  chief  owner. 

When  Te  Heuheu  and  nearly  sixty  of  his  tribe  were  over- 
whelmed by  a landslip,  with  the  village  of  te  Rapa,  where 
they  resided,  the  spot  was  kept  for  a long  time  strictly 
tapu,  and  no  one  allowed  to  set  foot  on  it;  determined  to 
make  the  effort,  as  several  who  were  Christians  had  lost 
their  lives  in  the  general  destruction,  I told  the  natives  I 
should  go  and  read  the  burial  service  over  them  ; viewing  me 
as  a tohunga  or  priest,  they  did  not  dare  to  offer  any  oppo- 
sition. I went  on  the  sacred  spot,  under  which  the  entire 
population  of  a village  laid  entombed,  and  there  read  the 
burial  service,  the  natives  standing  on  the  verge  of  the  ruin, 
and  surrounding  heights. 

It  is  evident  therefore  that  the  tapu  arises  from  the  will  of 
the  chief ; that  by  it  he  laid  a ban  upon  whatever  he  felt 
disposed.  It  was  a great  power,  which  could  at  all  times  be 
exercised  for  his  own  advantage,  and  the  maintenance  of  his 
mana , or  dignity,  which  in  some  respects  corresponded  with 
manorial  rights  ; frequently  he  would  make  some  trifling 
circumstance  the  reason  for  putting  a whole  community  to 
great  inconvenienience,  rendering  a road  to  the  pa,  perhaps 
the  most  direct  and  frequented,  a grove,  fountain,  or  any- 
thing else,  tapu,  by  his  arbitrary  will.  Without  the  tapu,  he 
was  only  he  tangata  noa , a common  man  ; this  feeling  long 
deterred  many  high  chiefs  from  embracing  Christianity. 

Few  but  the  ariki,  or  great  tohungas,  claimed  the  power 
of  the  tapu ; inferior  ones,  indeed,  occasionally  used  it,  but 
its  observance  was  chiefly  confined  to  their  own  retainers, 
and  was  often  disregarded  with  impunity,  or  avoided  by 
giving  a small  utu  or  payment,  but  he  who  presumed  to 
violate  that  of  an  ariki,  did  it  at  the  risk  of  his  life  and 
property. 

The  tapu  in  many  instances  was  beneficial;  considering 
the  state  of  society,  absence  of  law,  and  fierce  character ‘of 


TAPU. 


173 


the  people,  it  formed  no  bad  substitute  for  a dictatorial 
form  of  government,  and  made  the  nearest  approach  to  an 
organized  state  of  society,  or  rather,  it  may  be  regarded 
as  the  last  remaining  trace  of  a more  civilized  polity  pos- 
sessed by  their  remote  ancestors.  In  it  may  be  discerned 
somewhat  of  the  ancient  dignity  and  power  of  the  ari- 
kis,  and  a remnant  of  the  sovereign  authority  they  once 
possessed,  with  the  remarkable  union  of  the  kingly  and 
sacerdotal  character  in  person,  as  in  that  of  the  Lama;  it 
rendered  them  a distinct  race ; more  nearly  allied  to  gods 
than  men  ; their  persons,  garments,  houses  and  everything 
belonging  to  them,  being  so  sacred,  that  to  touch  or  meddle 
with  them,  was  sufficient  to  occasion  death.  The  gods 
being  no  more  than  deceased  chiefs,  the  arikis  were  re- 
garded as  living  ones,  and  thus  were  not  to  be  killed  by 
inferior  men,  but  only  by  those  who  had  more  powerful 
atuas  in  them  ; the  victorious  chief  who  had  slain  numbers, 
swallowed  their  eyes,  and  drank  their  blood,  was  supposed 
to  have  added  the  spirits  of  his  victims  to  his  own;  and 
thus  increased  his  mana  or  power;  to  keep  up  this  idea, 
and  hinder  the  lower  orders  from  trying  whether  it  were 
possible  to  kill  such  corporeal  and  living  gods,  was  the 
grand  work  of  the  tapu,  and  it  did  succeed  in  doing  so  : 
during  by-gone  ages  it  has  had  a wide  spread  sway,  and 
exercised  a fearful  power  over  benighted  races  of  men,  until 
the  stone  cut  without  hands,  smote  this  mighty  image  of 
cruelty  on  its  feet,  caused  it  to  fall,  and  like  the  chaff  of  the 
summer’s  threshing  floor,  the  wind  of  God^s  word  has  swept 
it  away  ! 


HE  RAKAU  WAKAPAPARANGA,  OR  GENEALOGICAL  BOARD. 


TE  HEUHEtl’s  TOMB  AT  PUKAWA. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

WHARE-KURA, 

Although  the  natives  had  no  places  particularly  devoted  to 
religious  purposes,  there  are  still  traditions  of  a temple 
having  once  existed  amongst  them.  The  wahi-tapu  or 
sacred  grove  was  not  a place  of  assembly  for  worship ; it 
was  entered  by  the  priest,  and  merely  contained  the  tombs 
of  chiefs,  offerings  to  the  gods  and  sacrifices,  together  with 
food  baskets  and  fragments  unconsumed  by  sacred  per- 
sons, rags,  and  the  old  garments  of  chiefs,  their  hair, 
when  it  had  been  cut,  and  such  things ; they  were  rather 
places  to  put  things  out  of  the  way,  a kind  of  sacred 
store  of  odds  and  ends.  The  Whare-kura  is  spoken  of 
as  having  been  a very  large  edifice,  in  which  all  the  tribes 
were  accustomed  to  meet  together  for  worship,  and  the 
rehearsal  of  their  several  pedigrees,  as  well  as  the  heroic 
deeds  of  their  ancestors,  for  holding  their  solemn  councils, 
and  administering  justice.  The  word  literally  means  a 
red  house  from  the  color  it  was  painted,  and  is  said  to  have 


WHARE-KURA. 


175 


been  in  existence  at  a place  called  Reporoa,  before  they 
left  Hawaiki  ; its  extreme  antiquity  is  seen  from  the  cir- 
cumstance of  all  those  who  are  recorded  as  having  met 
there,  being  regarded  as  ancient  gods  ; the  temple  had 
a porch  or  verandah,  such  as  they  still  make  to  their 
houses,  this  was  placed  at  the  gable  end,  by  which  they  en- 
tered, and  at  the  other  extremity  was  a small  building  in 
which  the  high  priest  resided.  The  Whare-kura  and  the 
Tuahus  were  enclosed  by  a fence,  beyond  it  were  the  abodes 
of  seventy  other  priests  who  had  their  houses  ranged  around. 
These  were  called  the  Tauira,  and  their  abodes  were  also 
enclosed  by  a fence,  being  considered  a sacred  court,  each 
building  bearing  the  name  of  one  of  the  heavens  ; the  posts 
which  supported  the  building  were  carved  to  represent  their 
chief  ancestors. 

The  different  tribes  which  met  there,  were  ranged  in  two 
grand  divisions,  one  Kahui  or  party  being  on  one  side  of  the 
building,  and  the  other  on  the  other  ; one  company  possessed 
a staff,  called  Te  Toko-toko  o Turoa,  whose  owner  was  Ran- 
gitawaki,  the  other  side  also  had  a staff,  named  Tongi-tongi, 
which  belonged  to  Mai-i-rangi,  perhaps  these  individuals 
were  the  chiefs  who  marshalled  their  respective  companies. 

In  the  Whare-kura,  no  food  was  allowed  to  be  eaten,  and 
the  breach  of  this  law  was  punished  with  death,  from  this, 
perhaps,  arose  the  custom  of  cooking  in  a separate  build- 
ing, or  kauta,  and  eating  outside  their  houses ; in  fact, 
the  chieffs  house,  in  some  respects,  seems  to  preserve  a re- 
membrance of  the  Ware-kura,  and  to  be  a kind  of  temple, 
having  its  household  god  and  altar,  represented  by  the 
carved  post  which  supports  the  building^ and  the  hearth  on 
which  the  fire  burns  before  the  image  of  the  great  progenitor 
of  the  family. 

The  tribes  which  assembled  in  this  ancient  building  are 
enumerated  : 

1.  Kauika  and  his  chiefs,  Kauika-nui,  Kauika-roa,  Kaui- 
ka-papa,  Kauika- wakaroa-korero. 

2.  Te  Kahui-wata  and.  his  chiefs,  Watanui,  Wata-roa, 
Wata-korero,  Wata-atua. 


176 


WHARE-KURA. 


3.  Tg  Kahui  Kapua  and  his  chiefs,  Kapua-nui,  Kapua- 
roa,  Kapua  tautahi,  Kapua- waka-roa-korero. 

4.  Rangi-tu-ana,  Rangi-tu-Tawaki,  Awhiro,  Roto-pua. 

The  family  of  Whiro  consisted  of  Monoa,  Wai-tu-rou-rou- 

atea,  Uri-hanga,  Marama-nui  o Hotu,  Rakei-i-pingau ; these 
chiefs  were  the  heads  of  the  tribe  of  Maru. 

The  persons  who  brought  the  flax,  and  made  the  sacred 
cord,  with  which  the  images  were  encircled,  were  Ure-manu, 
Taki-taki,  with  their  sisters  Rito-wara  and  Rito-maopo  who 
were  two  great  priestesses,  from  them  it  is  said  Turia-te- 
ngairi , the  grand  quarrel  arose,  which  finally  separated  the 
tribes. 

The  following  were  chiefly  reptile  gods,  who  also  ranged 
under  Maru  : — Tutangata-kino,  Tu-uatai,  Marongo-rongo, 
Tu-te  koronaki,  Pou-a-te-huri,  Huru-kakariki,  Huru-koe- 
koea,  Te  Rimurapa,  Paouru,  Paroro  the  High  Priest,  Witi- 
kikaeaea,  Tangaroa-matipua,  Karukaru,  Tawaki,  Te  Mata, 
Awipapa-te-mango-a-ururoa,  Te  Mata-o-te  rangi,  Maru,  Re- 
hua,  Taungapiki,  Riri-o-takaka. 

Uenuku  appears  to  have  been  a leader  on  the  contrary  side 
of  the  house,  and  with  him  were  one  hundred  and  eighty 
chiefs ; the  Kahui  Potona  and  the  Kahui-torea  of  Kai  Ranga, 
the  Kahui-po-poutiti,  Poutaha  Poukorero  ; the  Kahui-pepe, 
Pepe  mua,  Peperoto,  Pepe  te  mui-mui.  These  assembled 
to  hear  Uenuku  ; but  one  uncourteous  person  Potaringa  titia 
stopped  his  ears,  and  would  not  listen  to  him,  whilst  Pota- 
ringa a whea,  better  behaved,  was  attentive  to  his  words. 
Potapua-waka  was  also  a great  orator  in  the  Whare-kura ; 
but  half  of  the  assembly,  instead  of  paying  any  attention  to 
what  was  said,  aqjused  themselves  with  singing  waiatas  or 
songs  all  the  time.* 


Extract  of  an  old  Song  : 


Ki  mai  te  tangata  nawai  ra-e, 
Mau  e ki  atu 
Na  te  Kahui  pou, 

Na  poutiti  e, 

Na  poutaha  e, 

Na  pou  Korero, 

Na  Kapu  taringa 


The  man  will  say, 

From  whom,  you  reply, 
From  the  Kahui  pou. 
From  poutiti — alas. 
From  poutaha — alas. 
From  the  post  of  talk, 
From  the  perverse  ears, 


E tiki  ki  roto  aWhare  Kura-e,  &c.  Brought  within  Whare  Kura. 


WHARE-KURA. 


177 


At  first  this  temple  Was  a grand  place  of  union  for  all  the 
tribes,  but  afterwards  it  became  the  source  of  discord.  The 
tribes  which  assembled  in  it  quarrelled.  Kauika  broke  the 
staff  of  Mai-i-rangi,  and  this  became  the  signal  of  anarchy 
and  confusion  ; sorcery  and  witchcraft  were  then  practised 
against  each  other,  and  at  last  they  fought. 


He  Taunaha  ki  Kauika. 

Ka  mama  Kauika  tohunga, 

Ka  mama  Kauika  wakarongo 
korero, 

Ka  mama  Kauika  wakatama- 
tama,  i roto  i whare  kura. 


A gift  promised  to  Kauika. 

Easy  was  thy  work,  0 Kauika, 
the  priest. 

Easy  was  thy  work,  0 Kauika, 
to  listen  to  what  was  said. 

Easy  was  thy  work,  Kauika, 
grinning  within  the  walls  of 
Whare  Kura. 


Waka-taupotiki  set  the  building  on  fire,  and  a multitude 
perished  in  the  flames.  From  that  period  it  is  said  there  has 
been  no  union  amongst  them — one  tribe  has  ever  since  been 
opposed  to  another. 

Such  are  the  disjointed  parts  of  traditions  relative  to  this 
remarkable  temple.  They  are  interesting,  and  excite  our 
conjectures  as  to  their  origin,  since  they  must  have  been 
founded  on  something  which  once  existed,  and  are  the  more 
singular  from  referring  to  a building  erected  for  worship, 
having  never  since  had  anything  at  all  corresponding  to  it 
amongst  them.  The  Christian  natives  compare  it  to  Babel, 
and  say  it  caused  their  dispersion,  and  the  confusion  of 
tongues,  as  well  as  the  subsequent  state  of  enmity  they  have 
lived  in  with  each  other;  that  at  first  it  resembled  Solomon's 
temple,  where  all  the  tribes  met  together;  it  does  indeed 
seem  to  remind  us  of  the  separation  of  the  ten  from  the  other 
two,  in  the  reign  of  Rehoboam,  who,  like  Kauika,  broke 
the  staff  of  peace  and  unity,  by  his  folly;  supposing  this 
people  to  be  descended  from  any  of  those  tribes,  this  is  just 
such  a tradition  as  might  be  handed  down  from  so  distant  a 
period ; without  letters,  they  could  not  be  expected  to  preserve 
a fuller  account.  When  Israel  forsook  the  temple,  which  no 
longer  continued  to  be  a bond  of  union,  then  they  worshipped 

N 


178 


WHAkE-KUKA. 


in  high  places  and  groves.  Had  these  staffs  any  reference 
to  the  tree  of  life.,  and  the  tree  of  good  and  evil  ? or  to  the 
staff  of  beauty  and  bands? — See  Zech.  xi.,  7 — 10;  Jer. 
xlviii.  17. 

The  following  tradition  closely  refers  to  the  Whare-lmra  : — 

When  the  temple  was  finished,  they  sent  a messenger  for 
Whiro  and  his  sons,*  to  go  as  the  chief  speakers  of  Whare- 
kura  ; this  invitation  came  from  the  tribes  of  Kauika, 
Wata,  Kapua,  and  all  the  assembly;  when  the  messen- 
ger reached  Whiro,  he  said,  I have  come  for  you  to  be  the 
tohunga  or  master  of  ceremonies  for  the  house.  Whiro 
replied,  I cannot  go  there,  but  I will  send  my  sons,  Ma- 
rama-nui-o-hotu  and  Tai-nui-o-aitu  rourpu-atea,  therefore, 
return  all  of  you  together  ; the  two  sons  of  Whiro  went  and 
reached  Whare-kura,  where  they  were  killed.  They  then 
sent  other  messengers  for  Whiro  and  his  remaining  son 
Monoa,  to  induce  them  also  to  go  as  tohungas  for  the  house, 
but  in  reality  to  kill  them ; when  they  arrived,  they  said 
to  Whiro,  we  have  come  for  you,  as  your  sons  are  not 
sufficiently  learned  for  the  office.  Whiro  replied,  my  know- 
ledge is  no  greater  than  that  of  Marama-nui-o-hotu  and 
Tai-nui-o-aitu-rourou-atea,  f therefore  I shall  remain  ; but  I 
am  agreeable  that  Monoa  should  go  in  my  place.  Whiro 
said  to  his  son.  Seek  counsel  by  the  Niu ; throw  your  stick, 
the  ara  o te  manu  i te  ra , J for  perhaps  your  brothers  have 
been  killed ; he  therefore  consulted  the  Niu — the  omen  was 
unfavorable,  Monoa  said  to  Whiro,  his  father,  my  stick  is 
killed,  then  Whiro  replied,  go  cautiously,  and  when  you 
reach  the  house,  do  not  enter  by  the  door,  but  get  upon 


* Whiro  and  Tama  te  Kapua  were  the  gods  of  thieving.  They  went  on 
pou  toko  or  stilts  when  going  to  steal,  that  their  foot  steps  might  not  be  seen, 
and  the  better  to  reach  the  high  stages  (watas)  on  which  food  was  kept. 

f “ Kei  au  hold  heoti  na  no,”  this  reply  of  Whiro  has  passed  into  a proverb, 
because  all  his  knowledge  had  gone  to  his  sons,  whom  he  had  instructed. 

X In  consulting  the  Niu,  each  one  had  his  stick,  to  which  his  own  name 
was  given,  and  in  throwing  the  stick,  if  the  one  representing  the  consulter  fell 
under  the  other,  it  was  a sign  of  the  former’s  death. 


WHARE-KURA. 


179 


the  roof  of  the  pihanga ,*  and  there  look  in;  Monoa.  went 
and  arrived  at  the  Whare-kura;  the  men  of  the  house  in- 
vited him  to  enter  by  the  door,  but  Monoa  refused  to  do 
so;  remembering  the  advice  which  his  father  Whiro  had 
given  him,  he  climbed  upon  the  roof  of  the  house  to  the 
pihanga,  and  there  looking  in,  saw  the  lungs  of  his  brothers, 
which  the  priest  was  then  waving  to  and  fro  in  sacrifice, 
and  this  was  the  signal  of  flight  to  Monoa  ; when  the  men  of 
the  house  perceived  this,  they  went  and  pursued  him  ; he 
hastened  his  steps,  at  the  same  time  uttering  this  spell : — 


Hopukia,  hopukia, 

Hopu  ata,  hopu  ata, 

E kore  Monoa  e mou, 

I te  ra  kumutia, 

Tuaka  paukina, 

Te  maiangi  nni  no  tu, 

Te  mahana  no  tn, 

Rere  huru  huru  au, 

Rere  take  take  au, 

Rere  au  iho, 

Rere  au  ake, 

I runga  ano,  tauranga, 

Te  kuti  kuti,  tauranga, 

Te  awe  awe, 

Tuku  atu  au  kia  mangi  a manu, 
Rere  houmea, 

Tatu  mai  ata  tu 
Rarou  ka  hihiko, 

Ki  te  hau  raro  tukua, 

Tuku  aiho  i runga  nei 
Taka  te  ruhi, 

Taka  te  ngenge, 

Huri  papa,  &c., 


Catch  him,  catch  him,  [you  can, 
Catch  the  light,  catch  the  light  if 
Monoa  will  not  he  caught 
in  the  day  of  his  fear, 

He  has  arisen  and  got  away, 

He  is  light  as  the  wind, 

Warm  as  the  wind. 

I fly  like  feathers 
I fly  strong, 

I fly  down, 

I fly  up  above, 

Upon  the  perch. 

Afar  off  upon  the  bat’s  perch,  out 
of  reach, 

Leave  me  to  escape  as  the  bird, 

I fly  as  the  houmea,  a sea  bird, 
Lie  close  to  the  earth, 

Embracing  its  surface, 

Let  the  wind  blow  above  me, 
Weary  the  legs  of  the  pursuers, 
let  them  be  tired, 

Let  the  strong  wind  blow  against 
them,  &c. 


Monoa  fled  ; he  ran  into  the  middle  of  a flock  of  kauwaus, 
cormorants,  but  they  could  not  conceal  him  ; he  then  ran 


* Pihanga,  an  opening  made  in  the  roof  to  admit  light,  having  a small  roof 
over  it  to  keep  out  the  rain,  this  is  not  now  used.  It  is  probably  the  origin  of 
a name  given  to  a mountain  near  Rotoaira,  which  has  a remarkable  opening  in 
its  side. 


180 


WHARE-KURA. 


into  the  middle  of  a flock  of  ducks ; there  also  he  was  not 
hidden ; he  next  tried  to  conceal  himself  in  a flock  of  kuakas, 
sand  pipers,  but  in  vain,  he  then  hid  himself  in  a flock  of 
toreas,  large  gulls,  but  to  no  purpose  ; he  next  tried  a flock 
of  karoros,  penguins,  but  there  he  was  not  concealed,  at 
last  he  ran  into  a flock  of  tara,  a small  sea  bird  seen  in  great 
numbers,  and  there  he  was  completely  covered.  In  vain  did 
the  pursuers  search  for  him,  they  conld  not  see  him,  they 
returned,  Monoa  got  up  and  cried,  ke-ke-,  the  note  of  the 
bird,  they  all  immediately  arose,  he  then  cried  ko  iewa,  let 
us  go,  and  the  whole  flock,  tarai  whenua  kura,  which  covered 
the  entire  ground,  flew  away,  Monoa  escaped  in  the  day  of 
fear,  i te  ra  humutia , from  the  enemies  who  wanted  that  day 
to  enclose  him  as  in  a bag. 

The  Maori,  in  his  heathen  state,  never  undertook  any 
work,  whether  hunting,  fishing,  planting,  or  war,  without 
first  uttering  a karakia  ; he  would  not  even  take  a journey 
without  repeating  a spell  to  secure  his  safety  ; still  he  could 
not  be  said  to  pray,  for,  properly  speaking,  they  had  no 
such  thing  as  prayer.  As  in  war,  they  armed  themselves 
with  the  most  formidable  weapons  they  could  procure, 
and  laid  their  plans  with  the  greatest  skill  they  possessed, 
so  to  secure  the  fruition  of  their  desires,  they  used  their 
most  powerful  means  to  compel  the  gods  to  be  obedient 
to  their  wishes,  whether  they  sought  for  victory  over  their 
foes,  fruitful  crops,  successful  fishings,  or  huntings,  they 
called  in  the  aid  of  potent  incantations  ; when  they 
planted  their  kumara,  they  sought  to  compel  the  god  who 
presided  over  them  to  yield  a good  increase ; when  they 
prepared  their  nets  and  their  hooks,  they  must  force  the 
ocean  god  to  let  his  fish  enter  them  ; as  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  suffers  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  storm, 
so  the  heathen  Maori  sought,  by  spells  and  incantations,  to 
compel  the  gods  to  yield  to  their  wishes ; they  added  sacri- 
fices and  offerings  at  the  same  time,  to  appease  as  it  were 
their  anger,  for  being  thus  constrained  to  do  what  they 
wished  them.  Their  ancestors  were  addressed  as  powerful 
familiar  friends;  they  gave  them  offerings,  and  if  it  can  be 


WHARE-KURA. 


181 


said  that  any  prayers  were  offered  up,  it  was  to  them  they 
were  made. 

The  word  karakia,  which  we  use  for  prayer,  formerly  meant 
a spell,  charm,  or  incantation  : it  may  be  derived  from  ka, 
to  burn,  showing  the  consuming  power  of  the  spell,  and  raki , 
to  dry  up,  denoting  its  effects.  I remember,  many  years 
ago,  picking  up  in  France  a little  book,  published  by  autho- 
rity, entitled  “ Every  Man  his  own  Physician,”  which  con- 
tained spiritual  remedies,  such  as  Ave  Marias  and  Paternos- 
ters, for  most  of  the  diseases  to  which  the  body  is  subject. 
This  is  precisely  the  character  of  the  Maori  religion;  they 
have  spells  suited  for  all  circumstances — to  conquer  enemies, 
catch  rats,  snare  birds,  and  even  to  bind  the  obstinate  will 
of  woman,*  to  find  anything  lost,  to  discover  a stray  dog,  a 
concealed  enemy,  in  fact,  for  all  their  wants.  These  karakias 
are  extremely  numerous  ; a few  may  be  given  as  examples. 

A spell  for  the  pigeon,  that  its  oil  may  be  transparent  and 
abundant  when  roasted  : — 


Ka 

tahuna,  ka  tahuna, 

Te 

ahi tapu  e 

i Tiki, 

Ka 

kai  te  ata 

tapu, 

Ho 

mai  e Tiki  he  hinu, 

Ka 

ki  koe  he 

wai  kuku, 

Ka 

ki  koe  he 

wai  ruru, 

Ka 

ki  koe  he 

wai  kaka, 

Ka 

ki  koe  he 

wai  pitoitoi, 

Ka 

ki  koe  he 

wai  perakaraka, 

Ka 

ki  koe  he 

wai  tai, 

Ko 

te  puna  i 

whea  ? 

Ko 

te  puna  i 

Rangiriri,| 

Ho 

mai  kia  ringihia, 

Light,  light, 

The  sacred  fire,  0 Tiki, 

Let  it  be  kindled  in  the  sacred 
morn, 

Give  oil,  0 Tiki, 

You  say  it  is  pigeon  water, 

You  say  it  is  owl  water, 

You  say  it  is  parrot  water, 

You  say  it  is  pitoitoi  water, 

You  say  it  is  pirakaraka  water, 
You  say  it  is  salt  water, 

The  fountain  where  is  it  ? 

The  fountain  is  Rangiriri, 

Give  it,  let  it  be  poured  out. 


* Atu  ahu,  or  charm,  to  induce  a stubborn  woman  to  accept  the  person  who 
is  disliked  by  her  as  her  husband  : — Te  umu  ma  te  kahu  e hawe  ma  te  karoro 
e kawe  tua  wairangi  Tuapo  hewa  manuwairitua  manawa  rawrekau,  mihi  mai 
tangi  mai  ki  au  ki  tenei  tangata  kino  tenei  to  tane  ko  au.  This  charm  is  so 
powerful  as  to  compel  the  lady  to  come  from  any  distance.  The  offering  made 
to  the  gods  was  called  “ manawa:” 

t Rangiriri  is  a celebrated  fountain  in  the  sea  near  Hawaiki,  whence  all  fish 
originally  came.  Wai,  water,  poetically  put  for  oil. 


182 


RELIGIOUS  WORSHIP. 


A charm  to  raise  the  wind  : — 


Han  nui, 

Han  roa, 

Han  titi  parerarera, 
Keria  te  tupairangi, 
Moi,  moi, 


Lond  wind, 

Lasting  wind, 

Violent  whistling  wind, 

Dig  up  the  calm  reposing  sky, 
Come,  come. 


Another,  called  Wangaihau,  feeding  the  wind  : — ■ 


Hikitia  mai,  taua  kai 
Ki  Uenga  a te  rangi  tana  kai, 
Kai,  kai  mai  hn  ngaro  Ron- 
gomai, 

Heke  iho  i te  rangi  tana  kai, 

A charm  for  a burn  : — 

I wera  i te  aha  ? 

I wera  i te  ahi, 

Ahi  a wai, 

Ahi  a Manika, 

Tikina  mai  wakahorahia, 

Hei  mahi  kai  ma  tana, 

Wera  iti,  wera  rahi, 

Wera  kia  raupapa, 

Maku  e waka  ihi, 

Malm  e waka  mana, 


Lift  up  his  offering, 

To  Uenga  a te  rangi  his  offering, 
Eat,  0 invisible  one,  listen  to 
me, 

Let  that  food  bring  yon  down 
from  the  sky. 


It  was  burnt  with  what  ? 

It  was  burnt  with  fire, 

Fire  from  whom, 

Fire  from  Mauika, 

Fetch  me  some  fire,  spread  it  out 
As  a food  dresser  for  ns  two, 
Little  burn,  great  burn, 

Burn  be  coated  with  skin, 

I will  make  it  grow, 

I will  make  it  effective. 


In  worshipping  or  uttering  their  karakias,  different  ways 
were  adopted,  when  an  offering  was  made,  it  was  held  up 
by  the  tohunga  above  his  head,  whilst  he  uttered  his  karakia, 
and  waved  it  about ; this  was  called  He  Hirihiringa  atua. 
In  the  south,  where  a small  kind  of  image  was  used,  about 
eighteen  inches  long,  resembling  a peg,  with  a carved  head, 
He  waka  pakoko  rakau 9 the  priest  first  bandaged  a fillet 
of  red  parrot  feathers  under  the  god’s  chin,  which  was 
called  his  pahau,  or  beard,  this  bandage  was  made  of  a 
certain  kind  of  sinnet,  which  was  tied  on  in  a peculiar  way, 
called  kaka ; when  this  was  done,  it  was  taken  possession 


RELIGIOUS  WORSHIP. 


183 


of  by  the  atua,  whose  spirit  entered  it ; the  priest  then 
either  held  it  in  the  hand,  and  vibrated  it  in  the  air,  whilst 
the  powerful  karakia  was  repeated,  or  he  tied  a piece  of 
string,  formed  of  the  centre  of  a flax  leaf,  round  the  neck  of 
the  image,  and  stuck  it  in  the  ground ; he  sat  at  a little  dis- 
tance from  it,  leaning  on  a tuahu,  a short  stone  pillar,  stuck 
in  the  ground  in  a slanting  position,  and  holding  the  string 
in  the  hand,  gave  the  god  a jerk,  to  arrest  his  attention, 
lest  he  should  be  otherwise  engaged,  like  Baal  of  old,  either 
hunting,  or  fishing,  or  sleeping,  and  therefore  must  be 
awaked  : having  thus  secured  the  attention  of  the  god,  he 
repeated  his  first  karakia,  in  a quick  singing  tone ; this 
being  finished,  he  took  a short  piece  of  fern  stalk,  which  he 
stuck  into  the  ground ; then  gave  the  god  another  pull, 
uttered  another  karakia,  stuck  another  bit  of  fern  stalk  into 
the  ground,  and  thus  continued  until  he  had  repeated  all 
his  karakias,  which  were  counted  by  fern  stalks,  the  same 
as  beads  are  done  by  the  heathen  in  Thibet;  the  god  was 
supposed  to  make  use  of  the  priest's  tongue  in  giving  a 
reply,  and  the  atua  only  entered  the  image  for  the  occa- 
sion, the  natives  declare  they  did  not  worship  the  image 
itself,  but  only  the  god  represented,  and  that  it  was  merely 
used  as  a way  of  approaching  him.  They  have  a very 
great  unwillingness  to  repeat  their  karakias,  and  never  do  so 
to  strangers,  the  heathen  natives  think  there  is  such  power 
in  them,  that  they  cannot  be  even  uttered  without  taking 
effect,  the  Christianized  natives  are  afraid  that  the  mere 
repetition  would  give  the  evil  spirit  power  over  them.  The 
priest,  when  inspired,  was  really  thought  to  have  the  spirit 
of  the  god  in  him ; his  body  was  violently  agitated,  he 
writhed  as  in  great  pain,  rolled  about  his  eyes,  his  arms 
quivered,  and  he  seemed  insensible  to  all  external  objects ; 
then  every  word  spoken  was  attributed  to  the  god ; when 
the  answers  were  given,  the  symptoms  gradually  sub- 
sided, and  the  priest  regained  his  usual  composure.  The 
reply  was  frequently  given  in  such  incoherent  terms,  that 
the  priest  only  could  interpret  its  meaning ; the  whistling 
of  the  wind — the  moving  of  the  trees — a flash  of  lightning — 


184 


INFANT  BAPTISM. 


a peal  of  thunder — a whirlwind — the  flying  of  a bird — even 
the  buzz  of  an  insect — or  anything  which  might  occur,  after 
uttering  the  karakia,  would  be  regarded  as  an  answer,  and 
favorable  or  otherwise  according  to  circumstances. 

Dreams  are  very  common  vehicles  of  communication,  the 
spirit  being  supposed  then  to  visit  the  realms  of  Po,  and 
hold  communication  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  world. 
They  also  consulted  the  Niu  for  such  purposes  (see  Niu).* 
The  priest  was  the  usual  companion  of  the  chiefs,  and  he 
generally  managed  to  make  the  responses  of  the  god  to  suit 
their  wishes,  if  his  own  feelings  were  the  same  ; but  at 
times,  when  the  chief  undertook  any  expedition  which  was 
not  agreeable  to  his  followers  and  the  priest,  it  generally 
happened  that  the  god  also  was  adverse  to  the  undertaking. 

The  natives  had  a kind  of  baptism,  He  Told , for  their 
children  : when  the  iho,  navel  string,  came  off,  the  child 
was  carried  to  the  priest ; the  ceremony  commenced  by  the 
former  being  buried  in  a sacred  place,  over  which  a young 
sapling,  either  a ngaio,  karaka,  or  kahikatea  was  planted, 
which,  as  it  grew,  was  a tohu  oranga,  sign  of  life,  for  the 
child ; the  end  of  the  waha  jpakolto  radian,  idol,  was  placed 
in  the  child^s  ear,  that  the  mana , virtue  of  the  god,  might 
be  transferred  to  him,  and  the  following  karakia  was  re- 
peated : — 


Taria  kia  ahuatia  to  ingoa, 
Ko  wai  to  ingoa, 

Ko  rongo  to  ingoa, 

Tenei  to  ingoa, 

Wai  kni  maneane. 


Wait  till  I pronounce  your  name. 
What  is  your  name  ? 

Listen  to  your  name. 

This  is  your  name, 

Wai  kui  maneane. 


The  priest  repeated  a long  list  of  names,  and  when  the 
child  sneezed,  that  which  was  then  being  uttered  was  the 
one  selected,  those  repeated  were  of  ancestors ; the  priest, 
as  he  pronounced  the  name  for  the  child,  sprinkled  it 
with  a small  branch  of  the  kokomiko  or  karamu ; this 
act,  he  tohinga  Id  te  ivai,  was  their  baptism  ; the  naming 


* Page  178. 


INFANT  BAPTISM. 


185 


of  the  child  was  called  te  tuatanga,  or  jpana  joananga. 
After  this  was  done,  three  ovens  were  made ; the  first, 
which  was  very  small,  only  contained  one  little  basket  of 
food,  this  was  for  the  tino  ariki,  chief  priest ; the  second 
at  Taupo,  where  the  female  priests  were  the  most  highly 
esteemed,  had  a similar  quantity,  this  was  for  one  of  them ; 
the  third  oven,  a very  large  one,  contained  food  for  all  the 
guests;  in  the  first  a korimako  was  cooked,  the  sweetest 
singing  bird  of  New  Zealand : it  was  eaten  that  the  child 
might  have  a sweet  voice,  and  become  an  admired  orator. 
Taku  kokomako  wakahau  My  korimako  teacher  come 
No  nga  rake  manawa  From  the  dense  forest 

Ki  te  tatika  i pungarehu.  To  the  shore  of  pungarehu. 


In  imitation  of  this  bird,  which  only  sings  in  the  morning, 
the  high  chiefs  give  their  commands,  and  scold  their  slaves, 
with  the  first  dawn  of  day. 

The  form  of  baptism  was  rather  different  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  island  to  that  of  the  south.  There,  when  the 
infant  was  eight  days  old,  the  parents  and  friends  assem- 
bled near  an  appointed  place,  by  the  side  of  a.  running 
stream.  The  priest  procured  a branch  of  the  karamu, 
which  was  stuck  upright  in  the  water ; the  navel  string  of 
the  child  was  cut  off  with  a piece  of  shell,  and  fastened 
to  the  branch ; the  water  which  flowed  round  the  rawa, 
branch,  was  sprinkled  over  the  child,  when  it  received  its 
name ; sometimes  it  was  immersed.  The  following  karakia 
was  used  : — 


Tohia  te  tama  nei ; 

Kia  riri,  kia  nguha ; 

Ka  waka  taka  te  watu  ; 

Ka  tohi  ki  tai  mo  tu  ; 

Karo  tao,  karo  mahuta  ; 

Te  toa  rere,  te  toa  mahuta ; 
Karo  patu,  karo  tao  ; 

Te  toa  rere  te  toa  mahuta ; 
Ka  tohia  ki  tai  mo  Tu. 


Sprinkle  this  boy ; 

Let  him  flame  with  anger  ; 

That  the  hail  may  fall ; 

Dedicate  him  to  the  god  of  war  ; 
Ward,  ward  off  the  spears,  let 
them  pass  off ; 

Be  nimble  to  jump  about'; 

Shield  off  the  blow,  shield  off  the 
spear  ; 

Let  the  brave  man  jump  about ; 
Dedicate  him  to  the  god  of  war. 


186 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


After  tlie  baptism  followed  a 
Hahau  kai  man  tangaengae  ; 

Ko  koe  kia  riri  tangaengae  ; 
Ko  koe  kia  toa  ; 

Ko  koe  kia  mahi ; 

Ko  koe  kia  tahourahi. 

The  following  karakia  was 
children : — 

Tohia  te  tama  nei ; 

He  aha,  he  hau  ora; 

He  hau  rangatira ; 

Kei  runga  kei  te  rangi ; 

Ka  puha  te  rangi  ; 

E iri  iria  koe  ki  te  iri  iri ; 
Hahau  kai  mau,  tangaengae  ; 

Haere  ki  te  wahie  mau,  ta- 
ngaengae ; 

Watu  kakahu  mau,  tangae- 
ngae. 


kind  of  exhortation  : — 

Clear  the  land  for  food,  and  be 
strong  to  work ; 

You  be  angry  and  industrious ; 

You  be  courageous ; 

You  be  strong  to  work  ; 

You  work  before  the  dew  is  off 
the  ground. 

used  at  the  baptism  of  female 

Name  this  child  ; 

What  is  it,  a living  breath  ; 

A Chief’s  breath ; 

From  the  heaven  above  ; 

The  sky  has  breathed  forth  ; 

Be  you  baptized  with  the  baptism ; 

Seek  food  for  thyself  with  panting 
for  breath ; 

Go  for  firewood  with  panting  for 
breath ; 

Weave  garments  for  thyself  with 
panting  for  breath. 


In  addition  to  the  rite  of  baptism,  was  another  resembling 
confirmation. 

The  infant  was  dedicated  to  Tu , the  god  of  war ; but  he 
did  not  presume  to  fight,  until  he  had  received  a second 
sprinkling.  On  this  occasion  the  priest  again  used  a 
branch  of  the  karamu;  each,  on  the  declaration  of  war, 
assembled  his  own  party,  and  went  to  a sacred  stream ; at 
first,  all  sat  down,  but,  after  a time,  stood  up  naked  in  the 
water,  which  they  heaped  up  against  their  bodies,  and  threw 
over  their  heads  ; after  they  had  been  sprinkled  by  the 
priest,  he  said, 

Tena  te  au,  te  au  ka  noho, This  is  the  spirit,  the  spirit  is 

present, — 

Te  au  o tenei  tapu.  The  spirit  of  this  tapu. 

Ka  riri  te  tama  ; The  boy  will  be  angry  ; 

Ka  nguha  te  tama  ; The  boy  will  flame  ; 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


187 


Ka  toa  te  tama  ; 

Ka  wai  korou  te  tama. 
Tohia  te  tama  nei. 

Kia  riri,  kia  nguba, — 

Kia  wakataka  te  watu. 
Makani  ki  tai,  no  Tu, 

Karo  patu,  ki  tai  no  Tu. 

Te  toa  rere,  te  toa  mahuta. 


The  boy  will  be  brave  ; 

The  boy  will  possess  thought. 

Name  this  boy. 

That  be  may  be  angry,  that  be 
may  flame, — 

To  make  the  bail  fall. 

Dedicate  him  to  fight  for  Tu. 

Ward  off  the  blow,  that  be  may 
fight  for  Tu. 

The  man  of  war  jumps,  and  wards 
off  the  blows. 


Here  the  ceremony  terminated,  and  the  assembly,  as  if 
inspired,  jumped  up  and  rushed  to  the  fight,  while  the  priest 
repeated  the  following  karakia,  standing  on  some  elevated 
spot,  from  which  he  could  command  a view  of  the  battle  : — 

Tenei  hoki  te  tuputupu  we-  Thus  also  is  the  springing  up  of 
nua.  the  earth. 

Ka  . . . . i . . . . ta.  Let  not  your  breath  fail  you. 


After  the  battle  was  over,  the  priest  called  those  who 
survived,  and  enquired  of  each  if  he  had  killed  any  one,  or 
taken  any  prisoners ; • all  who  had  been  in  battle  before 
delivered  up  their  weapons  to  him,  who  then  deposited  them 
in  the  house  where  they  were  kept ; those  who  had  fought 
for  the  first  time  were  called,  and  asked  if  they  had  killed 
any  one ; if  the  person  addressed  replied  in  the  affirmative, 
the  priest  demanded  his  weapon  and  broke  it  in  pieces; 
this  was  the  invariable  custom  with  young  warriors,  when 
they  had  imbued  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  their  enemies. 
The  priest  having  afterwards  assembled  them  together,  used 
the  following  words,  which  were  called  the  Halm,  breath — 


Ha — ba — ba — 

Tena  te  bau,  te  bau  ka  wan- 

gai, 

He  bau  binga — 

He  bau  ora,  oi ! 

Ko  tamangemange  o Tu. 


This  is  tbe  wind,  tbe  wind  is 
feeding, 

Tbe  wind  descends — 

Tbe  wind  is  prosperous. 

Tbe  many  sacred  things  of  Tu. 


188 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


He  hau  hinga.  The  wind  descends. 

He  hau  ora,  oi ; The  wind  is  prosperous. 

Te  hau  ora  o Tu.  The  living  wind  of  Tu. 

The  natives  regarded  the  wind  as  an  indication  of  the 
presence  of  their  god,  if  not  the  god  himself. 

After  this  ceremony,  the  youths  were  considered  as  men, 
though  they  were  narrowly  watched,  for  some  time,  by  the 
priest,  and  were  even  liable  to  be  put  to  death  if  they  broke 
any  of  the  sacred  rules  of  the  tapu ; they  could  not  carry 
loads,  cut  their  own  hair,  or  plait  a woman's  ; if  one  of  them 
were  discovered  by  the  priest  doing  any  of  these  things,  he 
assumed  his  authority,  and  pronounced  sentence  of  death 
by  saying,  Go  away  ! Go  away  ! This  so  affected  the  person 
to  whom  it  was  addressed  that  it  was  quite  sufficient  to  kill 
him. 


There  was  another  ceremony  performed  after  fighting, 
which  was  supposed  to  confer  a benefit  on  all  who  had  been 
engaged  in  the  battle,  and  were  successful  in  killing  or 
making  slaves.  It  was  called  he  jpureinga , a taking  off  that 
sacredness  which  had  been  put  upon  them  before  the  fight ; 


or,  in  other  words,  removing 

Tena  te  hau. 

Te  hau  ka  riri. 

Te  hau  ka  wangai. 

*Te  hau  kohirunga. 

E hau  hinga  ! 

E hau  ora,  o . . . . i ! 

Ko  tamangamange  o Tu. 

Haia  te  hau,  haia. 

Te  ati  tupua. 

E tau  haia  te  ati  tawito. 

E ...  e ...  e ....  te  tau 
haia. 


the  tapu. 

There  is  the  wind. 

The  wind  rages. 

The  wind  is  feeding. 

The  wind  which  gathers  above. 
0 wind  subside  ! 

O living  wind  ! 

0 sacred  things  of  Tu. 

Loose  the  tapu. 

The  god  of  strength. 

Let  the  ancient  god  dismiss  the 
tapu. 

O...0...0...  the  tapu  is 
taken  away. 


The  natives  when  marching  or  sailing,  if  they  wished  to 
be  filled  with  the  spirit  of  war,  appealed  to  the  priest  and 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


189 


invoked  his  aid,  when  he  stretched  out  his  arm  at  full 
length,  and  used  the  following  prayer  : — 

E te  rangi  komai  he  riri ! 0 heaven,  give  us  anger. 

E te  atua,  homai  he  riri ! 0 god,  give  us  anger. 


Another  was  uttered  when  they  were  alarmed  by  any 
sudden  inroad  of  the  enemy ; it  was  used  by  the  toa}  or 
warrior,  whilst  putting  on  his  belt  and  mere,  which  he  took 
from  his  resting  place,  where  they  formed  his  pillow,  as  it 
was  the  head  which  gave  them  sanctity  : — 


Tukia  i roto  te  wara  waka- 
arahia : 

Ka  riri  te  mata  o Tu. 

Ka  nguha  te  mata  o Tu. 

E Tu,  wahia  te  rangi. 

Homai  taku  tu  kia  numia. 
Kia  rawea, 

He  maro  riri,  he  maro  nguha ; 

He  maro  kaitaua  ; 

He  maro  takarokaro  whenua. 


They  thought  of  killing  me  in  the 
house,  but  I have  arisen. 

The  face  of  Tu  is  angry. 

The  face  of  Tu  flames. 

0 Tu,  divide  the  heavens. 

Give  me  my  strength  to  abide, 
That  I may  be  quick  to  take. 
Long  and  strong  anger  and 
flaming  ; 

Strong  to  devour  the  battle  ; 
Strong  for  the  play  of  war. 


When  they  went  to  war,  they  were  separated  from  their 
wives,  and  did  not  again  approach  them  until  peace  was 
proclaimed ; hence,  during  a period  of  long-continued  fight- 
ing, they  remarked  that  their  wives  were  widows.  In  time 
of  war  they  used  to  signal  one  another ; this  was  done  by 
different  kinds  of  whistling,  or  a large  speaking  trumpet, 
made  of  flax  leaves,  five  or  six  feet  long,  which  could  be 
heard  from  a great  distance. 

When  a party  attacking  a pa  had  forced  an  entrance,  they 
generally  killed  all  within  it;  at  the  time  of  the  slaughter, 
the  victors  pulled  off  a lock  of  hair  from  each  victim,  and 
also  from  those  they  saved  as  slaves,  which  they  stuck  in 
their  girdles.  When  the  carnage  was  over,  they  assembled 
in  ranks,  generally  three  deep,  each  party  being  headed  by 
its  own  tohunga,  to  thank  their  gods,  and  propitiate  their 
favor  for  the  future  ; when  all  the  necessary  arrangements 
were  made,  each  gave  the  tohunga  a portion  of  the  hair 


190 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


they  had  collected,  which  he  bound  on  two  small  twigs  of 
koromiko ; these  he  raised  above  his  head,  one  in  each  hand, 
the  people  doing  the  same,  except  that  they  used  twigs 
without  any  hair ; they  remained  in  this  posture  whilst  the 
priest  offered  a prayer  for  the  future  welfare  of  the  tribe. 
He  then  cast  the  twigs  with  the  hair  bound  to  them  from 
him,  as  did  the  warriors  theirs,  and  all  joined  in  this  puha, 
or  war  song — 

Tupeke ! tupeke ! rua  tupeke  ! 

Baro  tirohia  mai  taku  kotore  : 

Ae  miro-miro,  he  weta-weta,  ki  te  kai  a te  ika  : 

Ka  pepeke  ruaki  i te  kai  a te  ika,  ka  tupeke  ! 

Then  standing  quite  naked,  they  clapped  their  hands  to- 
gether, and  struck  them  upon  their  thighs,  in  order  to  take 
off  the  tapu  from  their  hands,  which  had  been  imbued  in 
human  blood ; when  they  arrived  near  their  own  pa,  they 
marched  slowly,  and  in  order,  towards  the  house  of  the 
principal  tohunga,  who  stood  in  his  wahi  tapu,  or  sacred 
grove,  ready  to  receive  them ; as  soon  as  they  were  about 
one  hundred  yards  from  him,  he  called  out,  I haere  mai 
i hea  te  tere  o Tu  ? Whence  comes  the  war  party  of 
Tu  ? — Whereupon  he  was  answered  by  the  tohunga  of  the 
party,  I haere  mai  i te  himihanga  te  tere  o Tu.  The  war 
party  of  Tu  comes  from  the  search. — I haere  mai  i hea  te 
tere  o Tu  ? From  whence  comes  the  war  party  of  Tu  ? — 
I haere  mai  i te  ranga-haunga  te  tere  o Tu.  The  war  party 
of  Tu  comes  from  the  stinking  place.— I haere  mai  i hea  te 
tere  o Tu  ? From  whence  comes  the  war  party  of  Tu  ? — 
I haere  mai  i rung  a ; i haere  mai  i raro ; i haere  mai  i te 
huru  manu ; i haere  mai  i te  tahitald  ; i purongo  hi  reira ; 
i horero  rongo  hi  reira.  It  comes  from  the  south;  it  comes 
from  the  north ; it  comes  from  the  thicket  where  birds  con- 
gregate ; it  comes  from  the  fortifications ; it  made  speeches 
there  ; it  heard  news  there. 

When  they  got  near  the  principal  tohunga,  the  warriors 
gave  the  remaining  locks  of  hair  to  their  own  priest,  who 
went  forward  and  presented  them  to  the  chief  one  ; he 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


191 


offered  them  to  the  god  of  war,  with  many  prayers.  They 
then  performed  the  tujoehe , or  war  dance,  and  clapped  their 
hands  a second  time. 

The  slave  of  the  tohnnga  belonging  to  the  war  party 
then  made  three  ovens,  in  which  were  placed  the  hearts 
of  the  principal  warriors  slain.  When  they  were  cooked, 
the  chief  tohunga  took  a portion,  over  which  he  uttered 
a karakia,  and  then  threw  it  towards  his  god,  as  an 
offering.  Having  eaten  all  the  food  of  the  three  ovens,  he 
took  the  tapu  off  the  warriors,  and  they  were  permitted  to 
tangi , or  cry,  with  their  relations.  The  women  came  out 
armed,  and  if  any  of  the  attacking  party  had  been  lost  in 
the  assault,  they  fell  upon  the  slaves,  and  killed  as  many  as 
they  could.*  Among  the  Taupo  tribes  it  was  not  lawful  for 
women  and  girls  to  eat  human  flesh,  though  this  restriction 
does  not  appear  to  have  extended  to  other  parts  of  the 
island. 

This  karakia  was  used  to  propitiate  Maru,  for  success  in 
war.  It  was  accompanied  with  the  offering  of  a pig,  or 
other  food,  which,  when  cooked,  was  placed  before  the 
priest,  who  repeated  the  following  words  whilst  tearing  it  in 
pieces ; he  afterwards  devoured  it : — 


Ko  pi,  ko  pi  te  ata,  ka  kai 
ana, 

Kia  kai  koe  i te  kai  ngaki  o 
tou  wanaunga 
Tenei  tou  kai  i kai  namu  ai, 

Kia  wangaia  kai  namu  ai. 


Dark  dark  the  morning  when 
you  shall  eat, 

And  you  .shall  eat  of  the  food 
your  fathers  have  planted, 

This  is  your  food,  the  sand  fly 
shall  you  eat, 

The  sand  fly  shall  be  your 
nourishment. 


* When  Hongi  returned  from  a war  expedition,  the  widow  of  one  of  his 
chiefs,  who  had  fallen  in  battle,  rushed  down  to  the  canoe  as  it  approached, 
loudly  demanding  utu , revenge,  for  her  husband’s  death.  There  were  many  cap- 
tives on  board  ; she  jumped  into  the  canoe  with  a hatchet  in  her  hand  ; the  poor 
fellows  knowing  that  their  doom  was  sealed,  without  a murmur,  of  their  own 
accord  laid  their  heads  over  the  sides  of  the  canoe,  and  met  their  fate  from 
her  hands  ; sixteen  thus  fell  victims  to  her  fury.  Mr.  Puckey,  an  eye  witness, 
narrated  the  circumstance  to  me. 


192 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


This  is  a jeering'  song,  the  food  of  their  forefathers  plant- 
ing was  war,  which  sent  those  who  indulged  in  it  to  the 
Reinga,  where  they  would  feed  on  the  sand  fly,  the  food  of 
spirits. 

Before  going  to  war,  an  offering  was  generally  brought  to 
the  priest  who  placed  it  before  him,  and,  having  uttered 
these  words,  eat  it  : — 

Ka  mama  i te  umu  o te  riari- 
aki,  o te  hapahapai, 

Ka  mama  i te  umu  o te  Tuta- 
waki, 

Ka  mama  i te  umu  o te  wa- 
kauwanga, 

Ka  mama  i te  umu  o te  tiro- 
hanga. 


Light  is  the  oven  of  the  great 
ariki,  the  lifter  up, 

Light  is  the  oven  of  Tuta- 
waki, 

Light  is  the  oven  of  the  wor- 
shippers, 

Light  is  the  oven  of  the  be- 
holders. 


When  a war  party  returned  from  a fight,  if  they  had  been 
unsuccessful,  the  priest  met  them  with  a large  branch  in  his 
hand,  as  an  expiatory  offering,  and  uttered  this  karakia : 


Nau  mai ! I haere  mai  koe  i 
hea  ? 

Tenei  au,  I haere  mai  au  i te 
pikinga  a rangi. 

Nau  mai ! I haere  mai  koe  i 
hea  ? 

Tenei  au,  I haere  mai  i te 
kakenga  a rangi. 

Nau  mai ! I haere  mai  koe  i 
hea? 

Tenei  au,  I haere  mai  au  i 
te  ngakinga  i te  mate  o 
Wahieroa. 

Hikitia  mai  tau  rakau  ki 
runga  te  wata ; 

Tau  rakau  kia  kai  mai  kou- 
tou; 

Tau  rakau  hikihiki  taiaroa, 


Welcome  ! Whence  do  you 
come  ? 

Here  I am,  I come  from  the 
ascent  to  heaven. 

Welcome ! Whence  do  you 
come  ? 

Here  I am,  I come  from  the 
descent  of  heaven. 

Welcome  ! Whence  do  you 
come  ? 

Here  I am,  I come  from  work- 
ing the  death  of  Wahieroa. 

Lift  your  weapon  above  upon 
the  altar  ; 

Your  weapon,  that  you  may  be 
permitted  to  eat ; 

Your  beautiful  weapon,  lift  it 
up  on  the  sacred  stage  ; 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


193 


Hikihiki  taiaroa,  tai  notinoti  Lift  up  your  weapon  with  a 
piopio.  loud,  loud  cry.* 

Each  tribe,  or  Hapu,  had  its  own  Tau,  or  war  cry ; that  of 
Mamaku’s  tribe  in  Upper  Wanganui  is — 

Unu  unu  te  puru  o tuhua,  Pull  out  the  plug  of  the  inland 

tribes, 

Maringi  te  wai  o Puta.  Pour  out  the  water  of  Puta. 


When  the  hostile  parties  at  last  were  inclined  to  make 
peace,  they  met  together,  and  repeated  the  following  ka- 
rakia  : — 


Ka  hongi  maru,  ka  hongi  ki 
a Uenguku. 

Ka  hongi  a Uenguku  ki  a 
Maru. 

He  apito,  he  awanga. 

Mania  te  mania,  weo  te  weo. 

Korero  ka  toe  toenga  nui 
karanga  ra. 

Tena  ano  ka  riro  i a Uenu. 

Taku  waewae  te  maku  i te 
uru  Hawaiki. 

He  pito  aruhe  he  pito  ko- 
rero. 


Maru  salutes  Uenguku. 

Uenguku  salutes  Maru. 

A curse  and  its  removal. 

A slipping  of  the  foot  met  with 
a slipping  of  the  foot. 

Angry  speeches  met  with  angry 
speeches. 

A bitter  contention  departs  at 
Uenguku’ s call. 

My  foot  slips  away  from  the 
offspring  of  Hawaiki  (the 
angry  race). 

Let  the  end  of  a piece  of  fern 
root  be  the  end  of  our  talking. 


Maru  the  god  of  war — Uenguku  the  god  of  the  rainbow,  the  sign 
of  fine  weather  after  a storm. 


The  usual  way  of  proclaiming  war  and  inviting  friends 
and  allies  to  join  in  it  was  by  sending  baskets  of  human 
flesh  to  them.  Immediately  after  a battle  the  bodies  of  the 
slain  were  cut  up,  the  bones  taken  out  and  the  flesh  packed 
up  in  baskets  and  sent  by  swift  messengers  into  every  part. 
Whoever  received  the  present  and  partook  of  it,  thereby  im- 


* For  much  of  this  information,  which  relates  to  the  Rarawa,  I am  indebted 
to  the  Rev.  J.  Matthews,  of  Kaitaia. 


O 


194 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


plied  that  he  accepted  the  invitation ; so  in  Israel,  when  Saul 
heard  of  the  threat  of  Nahash  against  the  men  of  Jabesh,  he 
hewed  a yoke  of  oxen  in  pieces  and  sent  the  flesh  through- 
out all  the  coasts  of  Israel  (See  1 Sam.  xi.,  7,  and  Judges 
xxx.,  29). 

In  former  days  war  was  generally  waged  every  summer, 
it  was  the  regular  occupation  of  chiefs,  if  they  did  not  engage 
in  it,  they  were  said  to  have  nga  ringa  ringa  mahi  hai , the 
hands  of  husbandmen,  this  was  the  reproach  of  a Ngapuhi 
chief,  who  was  killed  by  a Wanganui  native  ; he  was  told  he 
had  the  hands  of  a laborer  and  not  those  of  a warrior,  as  he 
did  not  kill  him  at  once,  but  so  clumsily  as  to  cause  him  to 
linger  for  several  hours. 

A gentleman  was  not  considered  to  have  finished  his 
education  until  he  had  joined  a war  party  and  slain  his 
man,  as  sure  as  summer  came,  war  accompanied  it,  this 
seems  to  have  been  almost  the  same  everywhere ; it  was  so 
in  Israel  and  the  surrounding  countries  (see  2 Sam.  xi.,  1), 
even  amongst  ourselves  the  custom  has  scarcely  ceased  of 
noblemen  sending  their  sons  to  learn  the  profession  of  arms, 
as  it  is  politely  termed.  Some  even  yet  go  to  Austria, 
Prussia,  or  Russia  to  acquire  this  accomplishment  in  the 
greatest  perfection. 

When  Commodore  Wilkes  of  the  American  Scientific  Ex- 
pedition came  into  collision  with  the  Fiji  natives,  and  com- 
pelled them  to  sue  for  peace,  they  did  it  by  sending  a young 
female  with  a white  cock  in  her  hands  as  a peace  offering ; 
as  she  was  not  accepted  two  young  daughters  of  a very  high 
chief  were  next  offered  to  him. 

This  is  also  a Maori  custom.  Pomare,  a great  chief  of 
the  Ngapuhis,  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  did  the  same  to  the 
Governor,  Sir  J.  Grey,  as  a token  of  his  desire  to  make 
peace,  he  sent  his  two  daughters  to  him  as  a present,  and 
both  he  and  they  were  greatly  offended  because  they  were 
not  accepted.  One  of  the  officers  however  then  stationed  in 
the  Bay  was  not  so  fastidious,  he  secured  one,  and  some  one 
else  the  other. 

The  name  of  the  one  taken  by  the  officer  was  Nga  Huia, 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


195 


which  is  that  of  the  bird  most  highly  prized  in  New  Zea- 
land, on  account  of  its  feathers.  They  continued  to  live 
together  until  the  officer's  company  was  ordered  down  to 
Wanganui,  full  four  hundred  miles  further  to  the  south. 
Though  her  partner  left  her  she  was  determined  not  to  be 
abandoned,  but  actually  undertook  the  journey  on  horseback, 
an  extraordinary  attempt  then,  as  it  had  never  before  been 
done  there  being  no  roads,  it  was  the  more  wonderful  in  a 
country  like  New  Zealand,  filled  with  dense  forests  and  deep 
morasses,  rugged  mountains  and  rapid  rivers ; still  love  car- 
ried her  through,  and  enabled  her  to  overcome  all  these 
natural  difficulties.  She  went  by  Maunga  Kahia  to  the 
Wairoa,  thence  to  Kaipara,  Waitemata,  Waikato,  and  so  into 
the  interior  to  Taupo,  thence  to  Ahuriri,  and  crossed  over 
to  Otaki.  Beiug  the  eldest  daughter  of  so  great  a chief  as 
Pomare  she  was  there  received  with  the  greatest  respect,  and 
a large  cortege  of  young  chiefs  attended  her  to  Wanganui, 
which  she  reached  at  the  head  of  a cavalcade  of  fully  sixty ; 
her  entrance  was  that  of  a princess,  and  caused  quite  a 
sensation ; she  found  her  partner,  again  lived  with  him, 
and  some  time  afterwards  gave  birth  to  a daughter,  a very 
fine  fair  child  ; it  was  brought  to  Putiki  for  baptism,  and 
named  Nota  Elwes,  the  former  being  the  Maori  pronun- 
ciation for  North  Star,  a ship  of  war  in  which  her  father, 
Pomare,  had  been  confined,  having  accepted  a summons  to 
meet  the  Governor  he  was  detained  as  a prisoner  although 
a flag  of  truce  was  then  flying.  The  name  was  given  to 
commemorate  the  treacherous  act.  She  continued  to  reside 
at  Wanganui  for  a period  of  about  two  years,  when  the  officer 
received  the  news  of  the  death  of  some  relative  by  which 
he  came  into  possession  of  a large  property,  he  obtained 
permission  to  return  home,  and  left  poor  Nga  Huia  and 
his  child,  with  the  promise  of  sending  for  them ; no  letter 
ever  arrived,  she  waited,  and  waited  but  in  vain,  then  again 
returned,  to  her  father  and  gradually  pined  away.  It  is  said 
that  when  Nga  Huia  returned  home  she  showed  her  father 
a heitiki,  which  she  had  given  her  husband,  but  when  he 
abandoned  her,  as  it  was  a greatly  prized  jewel  of  her  family, 

o 2 


196 


WAR  CEREMONIES. 


she  got  it  restored,  her  father  said,  if  you  took  it  back 
again  after  having  given  it  to  him  it  is  an  aitua,  an  evil 
omen,  you  will  certainly  die,  and  so  she  did.  She  was  a fine, 
tall,  commanding  looking  woman. 

Her  father,  Pomare,  soon  followed  her  to  the  grave. 
Her  partner  is  now  a man  of  wealth,  and  poor  Nota  Elwes, 
her  child,  who  survives,  has  been  abandoned  by  her  unna- 
tural father,  as  well  as  her  mother,  the  once  well-known 
and  admired  “ Nga  Hum.”  Such  is  a short  episode  in  the 
history  of  New  Zealand. 


THE  PROW  OF  A WAR  CANOE. 


A FISHING  HUT. 


CHAPTER  X. 

FISHING  CEREMONIES. 


The  Religious  Ceremonies  connected  with  fishing  were  very- 
singular.  The  day  before  they  went  to  sea,  they  arranged 
all  their  hooks  around  some  excrement,  and  used  a karakia, 
which  will  not  bear  repeating ; in  the  same  evening  the 
following  invocation  was  uttered  : — 


E te  pu  nei,  e te  weu  nei, 

E ki  konei  hoki  koe, 

Ka  wano  te  tama  nei, 

Ka  tangiwaraue, 

Ko  ia  ka  uru  atu, 

Ko  ia  ka  urumai 
Ko  ia  ka  uru  to  hai, 

Keuwea  mai  te  pu  mai, 

Te  weu  mai  te  keuwenga  mai, 
0 te  matua  nui,  i a matua 
nui  ra, 

Ko  ia  i te  kewenga  mai, 

0 te  matua  nui  ra,  ko  ia  hai. 


0 ye  roots  and  little  roots, 

Soon  will  your  trunk  depart 
(being  made  into  a canoe), 
Soon  will  it  be  separated  from 
its  branches, 

Soon  go  out  to  sea, 

Soon  return  again  ; 

Soon  will  it  be  finished  ; 

Lift  up  the  trunk,  the  root  of 
the  great  father  remains, 
separated  from  him, 

This  is  the  launching  of  the 
great  father  the  trunk,  truly 
this. 


198 


FISHING  CEREMONIES. 


In  each  pa,  different  individuals  were  appointed  for  the 
several  karakias,  one  for  the  kumera,  another  for  fishing, 
and  so  on ; when  they  reached  the  sea,  and  all  the  hooks 
were  duly  arranged  (being  stuck  in  the  raupo,  with  which 
the  joints  of  the  side  plank  of  the  canoe  were  covered),  the 
tohunga  set  apart  for  .fishing  commenced  the  following 
prayer,  standing  up  and  stretching  out  his  arms  : — 


Tahuri  mai,  takuri  mai  e 
Maru, 

Tahuri  mai  e Henga, 

Tahuri  mai  e Kahukura, 

He  tapatua  ko  i uta, 

Ha  tapatua  ko  i tai, 

He  tapatua  Tane, 

He  tapatua  Tangaroa, 

Ko  tapatua  a te  hiri, 

Ko  tapetua  a te  bar  a, 

Ko  tapatua  a te  manuka, 

Ko  tapatua  a te  ngahoa, 

Ta  tapatua  Tane, 

Tangaroa  e au  ko  i uta, 

E au  koi  tai  e au  Tane, 

E au  Tangaroa,  ' 

Ko  te  au  a te  hiri, 

Ko  te  au  a te  hara, 

Ko  te  au  a te  manuka, 

Tena  te  au  ka  wiwi, 

Tena  te  au  karawhe, 

Tena  te  au  ka  mou, 

Mou  ki  mua  waka, 

Mou  ki  roto  waka, 

Mou  ki  tu  ta  mua  a Tane, 


Turn  to  me,  turn  to  me  0 Maru, 

Turn  to  me  0 Henga, 

Turn  to  me  0 Kahukura, 

Be  favorable  on  shore, 

Be  favorable  on  sea, 

Be  favorable  0 Tane, 

Be  favorable  0 Tangaroa, 

Be  favorable  at  the  sailing, 

Be  favorable  to  do  away  with 
sin, 

Be  favorable  to  take  it  from  the 
mind, 

Be  favorable  to  take  away  head- 
ache, 

Be  favorable  to  Tane  (the  tree, 
i.e.  canoe), 

Tangaroa  (sea),  let  thy  current 
flow  fair, 

Let  it  set  in  from  the  shore  for 
the  canoe, 

Let  it  set  in  seaward, 

The  current  is  unloosed, 

The  current  is  freed  from  sin, 
The  current  is  freed  from  the 
mind, 

Behold  the  current  is  gained, 
Behold  the  current  is  held, 
Behold  the  current  is  firm, 
Gained  before  the  canoe, 
Gained  by  the  side  of  the  canoe, 
Gained  beyond  the  canoe, 


FISHING  CEREMONIES. 


199 


Mou  ki  tapu  kaha  nui  o Tan- 
garoa, 

Te  waka  tauiratia  ana  mai  e 
koe, 

Te  kaha  Tane,  Tangaroa  ko 
taku, 

Kaha,  ko  te  kaha  awai, 

Ko  te  kaha  a Tama  Titoko, 
Tena  te  kaha  ka  wiwi, 

Tena  te  kaha  ka  rawe, 

Tena  te  kaha  ka 
Mon,  ki  mua  waka, 

Mou  ki  roto  waka, 

Mon  ki  tn  ta  mua  o Tane, 
Mon  ki  tapu  kaha  nui  o Tan- 
garoa, 

Mou  ki  tenei  waka, 

Mou  ki  tenei  tauira, 

Ko  koe  te  waka  tauiratia, 
Ana  mai  e koe  te  kaha, 

Tane  Tangaroa  te  wanatu, 

Taku  kaha  nei  ki  ware  pouri 

0 Tangaroa,  i tai, 

Te  homai, 

Te  herea, 

Te  notia, 

Te  nota, 

Te  waka  maua  ki  tenei  kaha, 

Te  wanatu  taku  kaha  nei, 

Ki  ware  huakina  o Tangaroa 

1 tai, 

Te  homai  te  herea  te  waka- 
maua, 

Ki  tenei  kaha, 

Tena  te  kaha  ka  wiwi, 

Tena  te  kaha  ka  rawe, 


Gained  in  the  midst  of  the  fish, 

The  canoe  is  rendered  sacred, 

The  strength  of  Tane  Tangaroa 
is  my  strength, 

The  strength  of  whom  ? 

The  strength  of  Tama  Titoko. 
Behold  this  is  the  strength 
gained, 

Behold  this  is  the  strength  ac- 
quired, 

Behold  this  is  the  strength  held, 
Before  the  canoe  to  be  held, 

In  the  midst  it  is  held, 

Before  Tane  it  is  held, 

In  the  midst  of  the  fish, 

Gained  by  this  canoe, 

Gained  by  this  spell, 

You  are  rendered  sacred, 

You  are  made  strong, 

Tane  Tangaroa  render  prosper- 
ous 

My  strength  in  the  dark  house 
of  Tangaroa  (deep  sea), 
From  the  sea  the  giving, 

From  the  sea  the  binding, 
From  the  sea  the  fastening, 
From  the  sea  the  holding, 
From  the  sea  the  retaining  by 
this  strength, 

The  prospering  my^strength, 
The  opening  of  the  door  of 
Tangaroa’s  ocean  house, 

The  giving,  the  binding,  the 
holding  firm, 

By  virtue  of  this  spell ; 

This  is  the  strength  gained, 
This  is  the  strength  obtained*, 


200 


FISHING  CEREMONIES. 


Tena  to  kaha  ka  mou, 

Mou  ki  mua  waka, 

Mon  ki  roto  waka, 

Ko  koe  te  waka  tauiratia  ana 
mai, 

E koe  te  kaha  Tane  Tan- 
garoa, 

E rarawe  taku  ure  ngana. 


This  is  the  strength  held, 

In  front  of  the  canoe, 

On  the  side  of  the  canoe, 

Yon  are  strengthened  by  the 
spell, 

With  the  strength  of  Tane  Tan- 
garoa, 

The  biting  of  the  fish  has  begun. 


The  first  fish  caught  was  returned  to  the  sea,  a karakia 
being  previously  uttered  over  it,  to  cause  it  to  bring  abund- 
ance of  fish  to  their  hooks.  If  the  kahawai  only  was  taken, 
the  women  were  not  allowed  to  partake  ; if  a tamuri  or  other 
fish  were  caught,  they  were  then  permitted  to  eat ; but  the 
first  fish  taken  belonged  to  the  priest.  On  returning  home, 
if  very  successful,  three  ovens  were  tapued  : 


The  first  was  called  He  Marae , for  the  elders  ; 

The  second  ,,  Te  Ihahoka , for  the  priest  of  the  canoe ; 

The  third  ,,  Te  Tukunga,  for  all  the  party. 

The  priest  took  a fish,  and  pulled  out  a villa,  or  gill,  then 
taking  it  to  a sacred  place,  and  holding  it  suspended  by  a 
string,  he  uttered  this  invocation  to  the  gods  : — 


Te  ika  te  ika  i Waitotara, 

Te  ika  te  ika  i Whenna  Kura, 

Te  ika  te  ika  i Patea, 

Te  ika  te  ika  i Tangahoe, 

Te  ika  te  ika  i Waengongoro, 

Te  ika  te  ika  i Kawia, 

Te  ika  te  ika  i Taranaki, 

Te  takina  mai  hoki  te  ika, 

Ki  tenei  rua  ki  tenei  one, 

Te  ika  ki  tenei  papa, 

Te  ika  ki  tenei  au  tapu, 

Te  ika  ki  te  an  tapu  nui  no 
Tane, 


The  fish  the  fish  of  Waitotara, 
The  fish  the  fish  of  Whenna 
Kura, 

The  fish  the  fish  of  Patea, 

The  fish  the  fish  of  Tangahoe, 
The  fish  the  fish  of  Waengon- 
goro, 

The  fish  the  fish  of  Kawia, 

The  fish  the  fish  of  Taranaki, 
The  drawing  to  us  the  fish, 

To  this  deep  hole,  to  this  bank, 
The  fish  to  this  ledge  of  rock, 
The  fish  to  this  current  made 
sacred, 

The  fish  to  this  current  made 
sacred  by  Tane,* 


Spoken  ironically,  being  the  land,  i.e .,  the  oven. 


MANNER  OF  HUNTING  THE  RAT. 


201 


Ki  te  autapu  o Tangaroa  te 
ika, 

Teretere  te  ika, 

He  ika  waka  mou  kaha  hai, 
Tena  te  ika  ka  moe, 

Ko  te  ika  o te  rua, 

Ko  te  ika  o te  one, 

Te  ika  o te  hohono, 

Tena  te  ika  ka  taki  ki  mua, 
Ka  taki  ki  roto, 

Ka  taki  ki  te  tnranga, 

Ka  taki  ki  te  kainga, 

Ka  taki  ki  te  au  tapu  nui  no 
Tane, 

Ki  te  au  tapu  nui  o Tangaroa. 


To  the  sacred  current  of  Tanga- 
roa. 

The  fish  swim, 

The  first  fish  is  caught, 

Behold  the  fish  killed, 

The  fish  of  the  deep  hole, 

The  fish  of  the  bank, 

The  fish  of  the  deep. 

Behold  the  fish  is  drawn  before, 
Is  drawn  to  the  side, 

Is  drawn  to  the  landing, 

Is  drawn  to  the  village, 

Is  drawn  to  the  sacred  current 
of  Tane,* 

To  the  abode  of  Tangaroa. 


In  former  days,  the  hunting  of  the  rat  was  an  under- 
taking of  some  importance,  and  required  a large  number  of 
persons  to  assist  in  it,  as  not  only  were  a great  many  traps 
required,  but  also  roads  had  to  be  cut,  which  were  made 
with  much  care,  as  the  slightest' obstruction  was  sufficient 


to  ruin  the  undertaking, 
assembled,  this  karakia  was 

Taumaha  ki  runga, 

Taumaha  ki  raro, 

Ki  taku  matua  wahine, 

I ti  ai  taku  kiore, 

Ma  te  reke  taumaha  taumaha, 
E taka  te  po, 

E taka  ki  tuhua, 

E taka  te  ao, 

E taka  ki  Karewa, 

I tutu  ai,  he  kiore, 


When  the  hunting  party  had 
sung : — 

Give  thanks  above, 

Give  thanks  below, 

To  my  mother, 

My  rat  squeaks  (it  is  caught) 

For  thy  coming  thanks,  thanks, 
Night  suitable  falls, 

Inland  it  falls, 

Bay  falls, 

At  Karewa  it  falls, 

What  is  that  standing  up  ? it  is 
a rat. 


The  hunting  party  then  cut  a line  through  the  forest, 
carrying  it  up  hill  and  down,  however  great  the  declivity; 
this  was  often  many  miles  long.  There  were  generally  two 
roads  made,  one  parallel  to  the  other ; along  them  were 
* See  Note  on  preceding  page. 


202 


THE  MANNER  OF  HUNTING  THE  RAT. 


many  tawiti  or  traps  placed.  The  first  was  called  tamatane, 
the  second  tamawahine.  If  a rat  was  taken  in  the  first,  there 
was  certain  to  be  a failure  along  the  whole  line ; but  if  in  the 
second,  they  then  made  sure  of  having  most  of  the  traps 
filled ; these  were  baited  with  miro  and  other  berries ; the 
bait  was  called  a poa;  when  the  first  rat  was  taken,  the 
following  karakia  was  used  : — 


Tai  tai  ki  runga, 

Tai  tai  e rangi, 

Ko  taitai  o tu  pahua, 

Ko  taitai  o te  wairua  to  a,* 
Ko  taitai  unuhanga, 

Tena  ko  taka  o te  wairua  toa, 
Marie  ki  tenei, 

Taitai  awa, 

Ko  tenei  taitai, 

Ko  taitai  unuhanga, 

Te  poa  ki  runga, 

Te  poa  e rangi, 

Te  poapoa  tukia, 

Poahaunga, 

Poa  kakara  tukia  ki  tenei, 
Poa  haunga  ki  tenei  poa, 


Tap  tap  above, 

Tap  tap,  0 heaven, 

The  tapping  of  the  hungry, 

The  tapping  of  the  strong  spirit, 
The  tapping  which  produces 
food, 

Behold  the  knawing  departs, 
food  will  come, 

Tap  tap  hungry, 

Thus  tapping, 

The  tap  tap  drawing  forth 
The  bait  above, 

The  bait,  0 heaven, 

The  bait  giving  out  its  fragrance, 
The  bait  strong  smelling, 

The  fragrant  bait  placed  for 
this  purpose, 

The  strong  smelling  bait,  this  is 
the  bait. 


They  commonly  caught  several  hundred  in  one  hunting, 
and  were  out  many  days  : when  all  the  rats  taken  were  col- 
lected together,  then  they  made  first  an  oven —hangi  atua — 
in  which  they  put  a rat,  as  an  offering  of  the  first  fruits  of 
the  chase  to  the  Atua ; this  was  lifted  up  on  a stage,  and 
then  the  priest  used  the  following  karakia  : — 

Te  kaha  ko  ia  unuhanga,  The  smell  is  drawn  out, 

Ko  ia  komokanga,  It  enters  the  nostrils, 

Ko  ia  puakanga  ki  waho,  It  spreads  in  the  air, 

He  popo,  popo  ngaruru,  The  bait  is  perceived  by  its 

fragrance, 


* The  spirit  of  hunger. 


WITCHCRAFT. 


203 


Te  huia  mai, 

Te  katoa  mai, 

Ko  taumaha  atu  ki  tau, 
Maha  a Bongo, 

Ka  ma  tama  kiri, 

Ka  ma  te  ware  rakau, 
Te  rangi  akinga, 

A Ware  Bakan, 


The  assembling, 

The  numbering, 

The  thanskgiving, 

To  Bongo, 

For  the  rats  living  in  the  bark 
of  trees, 

For  that  is  their  house, 

Heaven  brings  them 

From  their  homes  in  the  trees. 


A second  oven  was  made,  in  which  two  rats  were  cooked ; 
this  was  sacred  to  the  priest ; a third  oven  had  about  ten  in 
it ; this  also  was  for  the  priest ; a fourth  had  a large  number 
in  proportion  to  those  employed  in  the  hunt,  for  whom  it 
was  sacred;  the  fifth  oven  had  a still  larger  number  in  it, 
for  all  in  common ; but  no  one  touched  the  food  until  the 
offering  and  karakia  to  the  atua  had  been  made. 

The  general  size  of  the  Maori  rat  is  about  one-third  that 
of  the  Norway ; it  was  formerly  very  abundant ; but  now, 
from  one  cause  or  other,  is  nearly  extinct ; its  two  grand 
enemies  are  the  cat  and  imported  rat ; this  little  animal  is 
said  to  run  only  in  a straight  line,  if  the  roads  made  for  it 
were  at  all  crooked,  it  turned  off  where  they  diverged,  and 
ran  into  the  forest.  The  rat  was  formerly  prized  for  food, 
and  said  to  have  been  very  fat  and  delicate  eating ; much 
oil  was  extracted  from  it. 


Nearly  allied  to  these  supposed  charms  or  spells  was 
makutu , or  witchcraft. 

When  a native  had,  or  fancied  he  had,  received  an  injury 
from  another,  he  sought  the  destruction  of  his  enemy  by 
witchcraft,  if  he  could  not  obtain  it  by  other  means ; if  he 
had  a pig  stolen,  he  would  say,  go  away,  my  pig,  with- 
out a payment;  he  then  took  a branch  of  tree,  and  went 
to  a spring  of  water,  used  incantations  to  his  atua,  until 
the  person  who  had  injured  him  appeared  before  him,  when 
this  was  the  case,  the  bewitched  person  was  sure  to  die,  but 
then  it  also  endangered  the  other’s  life  as  well.  The  person 


204 


WITCHCRAFT. 


who  wished  to  bewitch  another,  sought  to  obtain  something 
belonging  to  him — a lock  of  hair,  a portion  of  his  garment, 
or  even  some  of  his  food ; this  being  possessed,  he  uttered 
certain  spells  over  it,  and  then  buried  it ; as  the  article 
decayed,  the  individual  also  was  supposed  to  waste  away; 
this  was  sure  to  be  the  case  if  the  victim  heard  of  it,  fear 
quickly  accomplishing  his  enemy's  wish  ; the  person  who 
bewitched  another  remained  three  days  without  eating ; on 
the  fourth  he  eat,  and  his  victim  died.  The  natives  were 
afraid  of  their  food  being  bewitched  ; when  they  embraced 
Christianity,  they  were  very  particular  in  asking  a blessing 
on  it,  to  prevent  the  evil  wishes  of  their  enemies  from  taking 
effect.* 

The  power  of  bewitching  was  not  confined  to  the  priests, 
but  supposed  to  be  possessed  by  every  one,  a simple  wish 
often  being  sufficient ; many  instances  have  fallen  under 
the  notice  of  the  Missionaries,  where  those  bewitched  have 
died,  although  unaware  of  their  being  so.  In  the  early 
days  of  the  Mission,  those  who  opposed  the  Gospel  tried 
by  witchcraft  to  destroy  the  preachers  of  it;  this  was  fre- 
quently practised  upon  several  of  our  members,  and  it  is 
remarkable,  that  the  individuals  who  made  the  attempt, 
died  themselves  shortly  after,  which  was  attributed  solely 
to  their  having  failed  in  injuring  the  parties  sought  to  be 
destroyed,  this  was  the  case  twice  with  individuals  who 
endeavoured  to  makutu  the  Missionaries  of  Otaki  and 
Wanganui ; at  the  latter  place,  one  who  sought  his  death 
was  a head  chief,  he  was  the  very  first  person  killed  in 
the  war,  which  immediately  afterwards  broke  out ; two 
others  attempted  the  same,  and  they  also  shortly  after 
died ; the  fact  that  they  have  been  unable  to  injure  us  in 
this  way,  has  caused  many  to  embrace  the  Gospel,  as  they 
ascribed  our  safety  to  the  greater  power  of  our  God.f  I 

* A native  put  a question  to  me  relative  to  food  on  which  a blessing  had 
been  asked, — Is  it  right  to  give  even  a bone  of  food  thus  sanctified  to  a dog  ? 
I replied,  that  we  only  asked  a blessing  On  the  portion  consumed,  and  not 
on  what  was  left.  He  might  therefore  give  his  dog  the  fragments. 

f The  relatives  of  Maketu,  the  chief  who  had  uttered  the  curse,  came,  after 


N1U. 


205 


once  heard  a story  of  an  Irish  sailor,  who  fancied  he  had 
been  bewitched  by  a native ; poor  Paddy  became  alarmed, 
and  anxiously  demanded  what  he  should  do  to  get  free ; he 
was  recommended  to  go  to  the  tohunga,  who  had  bewitched 
him,  with  a handsome  present  in  his  hands  ; the  advice  was 
adopted,  Paddy  was  graciously  received,  and  gravely  ordered 
to  open  his  mouth,  when  the  other  spit  into  it,  and  then  told 
him  he  might  rest  satisfied,  no  evil  would  befall  him,  for  he 
had  made  him  noa , or  removed  the  spell. 

One  of  our  countrymen  living  at  Mokau,  a swearing, 
blaspheming  fellow,  was  thought  to  possess  this  power,  from 
some  individual  who  had  been  cursed  and  sworn  at  by  him, 
suddenly  dying ; the  natives  afterwards  had  the  greatest 
fear  of  him,  and  even  Poutama,  the  head  chief,  who  was  in 
general  an  overbearing  man,  was  quite  afraid  of  the  fellow ; 
he  had  sold  some  pigs  to  him,  but  did  not  dare  to  ask  him 
for  payment,  and  he,  being  a rogue,  never  gave  any. 

The  natives  had  a way  of  divination  by  means  of  sticks ; 
this  was  called  Niu.  Herodotus  relates  that  the  Scythians 
had  a similar  mode.  Ezekiel  speaks  of  divination  by  a rod 
or  wand,  and  probably  Hosea  alludes  to  the  same,  c<  My 
people  ask  counsel  at  their  stocks,  and  their  staff  declareth 
unto  them.”  (Hosea  iv.  12.)  The  pur  alluded  to  in  Esther 
may  have  resembled  it.  (Esth.  iii.  7.)  Each  chief  had  a 
particular  name  for  his  own  stick ; thus,  that  of  one  chief 
was  called  Te  at  a mounu  ; of  another  Te.  manu  i te  ra  ; and 
a third  Tongo  hiti.  The  person  consulting  the  Niu  went  out 
in  the  morning  before  it  was  light,  so  that  no  one  should 
have  been  before  him,  which  would  destroy  the  power  of  the 
consultation ; taking  his  stick,  a short  thin  one  made  of  the 
mahoe,  in  his  right  hand,  and  another  representing  the 
enemy  in  the  left,  he  went  and  stuck  a third  in  the  ground 
for  the  tapu  ; and  placing  the  two  sticks  together,  one 
across  the  other,  he  uttered  a karakia,  then  threw  them 

his  death,  and  demanded  whether  I had  not  also  cursed  him,  and  thus  been 
the  cause  of  his  being  killed,  thinking  my  curse  had  proved  the  most  powerful. 
I replied,  Ministers  never  curse  even  their  enemies,  as  Scripture  bids  them  bless 
and  curse  not.  They  went  away  quite  satisfied. 


206 


NIU. 


in  front  of  the  third,  and  it  was  according  to  their  position 
that  the  consul  ter  ascertained  whether  any  one  was  travelling 
on  the  road,  whether  they  were  friends  or  foes,  and  if  the 
latter,  whether  they  would  be  conquered  or  not.* 

Different  tribes  had  various  ways  of  consulting  the  Niu, 
but  the  practice  was  general  throughout  the  land.  A spirit 
called  Korohaha  Tu,  was  supposed  to  reside  in  the  sticks. 

The  following  was  a karakia  used  when  the  divination  was 
made  with  the  hands,  and  therefore  called  He  niu  ringa- 
ringa : — 


Kia  mana  tenei  niu  ; 
Tenei  te  niu  ka  rere  ; 
He  niu  na  Paki 
Ko  te  he  kia  puta. 


Let  this  niu  be  strong  ; 

This  is  the  niu,  there  it  goes  ; 
A niu  of  Paki. 

The  bad  let  it  be  seen. 


Whilst  this  was  being  said,  the  person  kept  clapping  his 
hands  together ; if  the  fingers  locked  within  each  other, 
it  was  a good  sign  for  a party  wishing  to  pass  along  a road, 
in  time  of  war,  they  would  succeed,  and  arrive  safe ; if,  how- 
ever, the  finger  ends  rested  one  on  the  other,  it  was  a sign 
they  would  be  stopped;  if  two  of  the  fingers  entered  and 
two  were  arrested,  it  was  a sign  they  would  only  meet  with 
a travelling  party. 


* If  the  stick  representing  his  tribe  fell  above  the  other,  it  was  a favourable 
sign  ; if  below,  a bad  one. 

With  them,  as  with  the  heathen  in  general,  the  most  trifling  things  are 
invested  with  the  greatest  importance  ; thus,  the  cutting  the  hair  (purei)  was 
done  with  much  ceremony,  and  repeating  many  spells  ; the  operator  was 
made  iapu,  for  this  service,  and  until  he  had  finished,  could  not  feed  himself, 
or  engage  in  any  other  employment.  When  the  hair  was  cut,  a portion  was 
cast  into  the  fire,  and  the  following  karakia  was  uttered  : — 

Oe  he  pikinga  he  kakenga,  Piki  mai  te  rangi  tua  toru, 

Ka  e kei  tua,  kei  waho  kei  tuatua,  Piki  mai  te  rangi  tua  wa, 

Kei  te  karawa  kei  te  ranginui  e tu  nei,  Piki  mai  te  rangi  tua  rima, 

Piki  mai  te  rangi  tua  tahi,  Piki  mai  te  rangi  tua  ono, 

Piki  mai  te  rangi  tua  rua,  He  rangi  he  hei  te  uru.  — uru. 

This  was  a karakia  to  avert  the  bad  effects  of  thunder  and  lightning,  which 
were  supposed  to  be  occasioned  by  this  potent  operation. 

The  word  Niu  is  also  used  in  Tonga  for  a divination  by  means  of  a cocoa  nut, 
which  is  spun  upon  the  ground,  and  according  to  its  motions  a favourable 
or  unfavourable  omen  is  drawn. 


NIU. 


207 


It  is  remarkable,  that  although  the  natives  had  innumer- 
able karakias  and  rites,  yet  they  had  no  stated  festivals,  or 
any  days  more  sacred  than  others,  nor  had  they  a system 
common  to  all  ; their  religion,  indeed,  may  be  regarded  as 
of  an  individual  rather  than  of  a national  character,  each  one 
being  independent  of  his  neighbour,  and  at  liberty  to  follow 
his  own  ideas  ; although  there  were  persons  called  priests, 
who  officiated  on  certain  occasions,  such  as  before  entering 
upon  a war  expedition,  planting  or  reaping  the  kumara, 
fishing  or  hunting ; still  this  did  not  interfere  with  each 
one^s  individual  right  to  use  whatever  karakias  he  might 
think  fit,  and  whenever  he  pleased.  In  this  respect  they 
differed  from  most  nations,  which  in  general  are  so  tenacious 
of  any  interference  with  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the 
constituted  priesthood. 

The  freedom  in  spiritual  matters  naturally  caused  a great 
diversity  of  rites  and  customs ; often  what  was  practised  in 
one  place,  would  be  quite  different  from  that  in  another. 
This  chiefly  depended  upon  some  individual,  whether  a to- 
hunga  or  not,  who  was  supposed  to  be  more  gifted  in  one 
department  than  another  ; for  instance,  the  chief  of  Waitotara 
was  considered  to  be  profoundly  wise  in  the  stars,  knowing 
all  their  names  and  powers ; his  people  therefore  became 
the  chief  worshippers  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  there  the 
only  resemblance  to  a stated  period  of  worship  existed,  for 
each  star  had  its  karakia  when  it  was  in  the  ascendant ; so 
also  was  it  with  the  moon,  which  the  chief  of  another  place 
was  supposed  to  be  the  best  acquainted  with ; he  had  a 
karakia,  when  the  new  moon  appeared.  In  one  place,  the 
hurihanga  tau , or  new  year,  was  celebrated  with  a karakia ; 
in  another,  the  most  sacred  day  of  the  year  was  that  ap- 
pointed for  hair  cutting;  the  people  assembled  from  all  the 
neighbouring  parts,  often  more  than  a thousand  in  number ; 
the  operation  being  commenced  with  karakia,  the  operator 
and  his  obsidian,  substitute  for  scissors,  being  thus  rendered 
peculiarly  sacred. 

The  piece  of  obsidian  too,  with  which  the  hair  was  cut, 
had  this  karakia  uttered  to  render  it  efficacious  : — 


208 


CURSING. 


Mori  mori  ta  kiki, 

Mori  mori  ta  kaka, 

I te  waruhanga  a te  mata, 
Ko  i to  ko  ata 
I taku  ipn  waka  iroiro. 


The  hair  is  gone, 
The  hair  is  shorn, 


By  the  cutting  of  the  stone 
The  head  is  as  bare 
As  the  calabash. 


In  some  places,  the  hair  was  cut  only  in  the  morning ; in 
Taupo  in  the  evening ; tlie  hair  in  other  parts  was  laid  upon 
the  tuahu,  or  altar,  whilst  the  karakia  was  uttered,  and  left 
there,  the  tuahu  being  in  the  wahi  tapu,  or  sacred  grove. 

Tapatapa,  or  Tukutuku,  to  curse,  was  a way  of  obtaining 
revenge.  To  call  any  object  by  the  name  of  a chief,  and  then 
strike  or  insult  it,  was  regarded  as  a Kanga  or  curse,  to  ap- 
ply any  word  to  another  which  had  reference  to  food,  to 
say,  you  be  eaten,  or  be  cooked,  would  be  considered  in 
that  light,  the  following  is  an  example  : — To  bid  you  go  and 
cook  your  father  would  be  a great  curse,  but  to  tell  a person 
to  go  and  cook  his  great  grandfather  would  be  far  worse, 
because  it  included  every  individual  who  has  sprung  from 
him.  This  would  have  been  quite  sufficient  in  former  days 
to  cause  a war ; it  could  not  have  been  overlooked.  Tenei 
ton  roro,  ko  te  kowhatu  e tu  ki  te  ahi  kai,  kia  reka  iho  ai 
taku  kianga  iho  — e ; if  this  stone  which  stands  by  the  food 
fire,  i.e.j  the  kitchen  hearth,  were  your  brain,  how  very  sweet 
would  it  be  for  my  eating. 

Ajpiti  was  also  a term  for  cursing ; any  one  who  used  a word, 
however  unintentionally,  which  was  regarded  as  a curse,  would 
be  exposed  to  extreme  danger;  a young  man,  who  saw  a 
chief  running  in  a great  heat,  and  the  perspiration  flowing 
down  his  cheeks,  remarked,  that  the  vapour  rose  from  his 
head  like  the  steam  of  an  oven  ; the  expression  was  regarded 
as  a great  curse,  and  caused  a war,  which  did  not  terminate 
until  the  entire  tribe  of  the  person  who  uttered  it  was  des- 
troyed.* Thus  the  expulsion  of  the  Nga  ti  waka  tere  and  Te 
Rauparaha  from  Maunga-tautari  was  caused. 

* He  kai  mau  te  tangata  Food  for  thee,  O fish,  is  the  man 

Makutu  mai,  whom  thus  I curse,  wh  o by  his  witch  - 

Mahara  mai,  craft  and  wishing  me  ill  luck,  is  the 


KURA RED. 


209 


Kei  reira  to  hara 
Harahara  aitua, 
Harahara  atai 
Ipakia  ai  koe, 

Irahau  ai  koe, 

Niniho  koi,  tara  koe 
Kei  te  tai  timu, 

Kei  te  tai  pari, 

Kei  a Rangi  riri 
Haukumea  hautoia 
Nau  ka  nga  atua, 

Anga  atu  nau 
Ka  anga  mai,  anga  mai. 


real  cause  that  none  of  you  will  take 
my  bait.  What  have  you  done  that 
they  should  thus  bewitch,  and  with 
their  ill  omens  and  curses,  reach  you  ; 
you  have  been  by  witchcraft  touched, 
by  curses  smitten,  those  teeth  of  yours, 
so  keen  and  sharply  pointed ; at  the 
ebb  tide,  or  at  the  flood,  you  are 
the  best  caught ; then  you  return  to 
Rangi  riri’s  fount.  Come,  pull  away 
at  my  bait,  drag  out  my  line.  If 
finished  be  your  nibbling,  then  be- 
gone ; but  if  you  will  bite  again,  come 
quickly.  * — Maori  Gazette. 


A chief  named  Rona,  one  night  being  very  thirsty,  when 
his  wife  was  from  home,  was  compelled  to  go  to  the  spring 
himself,  much  to  his  annoyance,  as  it  was  degrading  for  him 
to  do  so  j as  he  went,  the  moon  became  overcast,  and  he 
struck  his  foot  against  a stone,  in  his  anger  he  said,  Awhea 
te  puta  ai  te  marama  upoko  taona  ? — When  will  the  moon 
make  its  cooked  head  appear  ? which,  being  a great  curse, 
caused  it  immediately  to  descend,  and  take  both  him  and 
his  calabash  up  with  it ; this  is  the  way  the  natives  account 
for  the  spots  on  its  surface. 

Closely  connected  with  religion,  was  the  feeling  they 
entertained  for  the  Kura,  or  Red  Paint — which  was  the 
sacred  color ; their  idols,  Pataka,  sacred  stages  for  the  dead, 
and  for  offerings  or  sacrifices,  Urujoa  graves,  chiefs  houses, 
and  war  canoes,  were  all  thus  painted. 

The  way  of  rendering  anything  tapu  was  by  making  it  red. 
When  a person  died,  his  house  was  thus  colored ; when  the 
tapu  was  laid  on  anything,  the  chief  erected  a post  and 
painted  it  with  the  kura ; wherever  a corpse  rested,  some 
memorial  was  set  up,  oftentimes  the  nearest  stone,  rock,  or 
tree  served  as  a monument ; but  whatever  object  was  selected, 
it  was  sure  to  be  made  red.  If  the  corpse  were  conveyed 
by  water,  wherever  they  landed  a similar  token  was  left; 
and  when  it  reached  its  destination,  the  canoe  was  dragged 
on  shore,  thus  distinguished,  and  abandoned.  When  the 

* This  is  a curse  upon  some  unknown  enemy  of  the  fisher,  who  had  bewitched  the  fish 
that  they  would  not  come  to  his  bait,  thereby  causing  him  ill  luck. 


P 


210 


KURA — RED. 


hahunga  took  place,  the  scraped  bones  of  tbe  chief,  thus 
ornamented,  and  wrapped  in  a red-stained  mat,  were  de- 
posited in  a box  or  bowl,  smeared  with  the  sacred  color, 
and  placed  in  a tomb.  Near  his  final  resting-place  a lofty 
and  elaborately-carved  monument  was  erected  to  his  memory ; 
this  was  called  he  tihi,  which  was  also  thus  colored. 

In  former  times  the  chief  anointed  his  entire  person  with 
red  ochre ; when  fully  dressed  on  state  occasions,  both  he 
and  his  wives  had  red  paint  and  oil  poured  upon  the  crown 
of  the  head  and  forehead,  which  gave  them  a gory  appear- 
ance, as  though  their  skulls  had  been  cleft  asunder. 

Red  appears  to  have  ever  been  a sacred  color ; it  is  still 
so  in  heathen  lands,  and  has  been  from  remote  antiquity. 
The  tabernacle  was  covered  with  skins  dyed  red  • the  idols  of 
Egypt  were  red  ; the  houses  of  princes  were  ceiled  with  cedar, 
and  painted  with  vermillion  ; Ezekiel  speaks  of  the  Chaldean 
images  pourtrayed  with  it ; Jezebel  painted  herself  doubtless 
with  a similar  pigment,  hence  we  gather  that  red  was  then 
used  by  princes  as  a mark  of  dignity.  (2  Kings  ix.  30.) 
The  heathen  power  is  described  by  St.  John  as  a great  red 
dragon,  and  the  anti-Christian  one  as  a woman,  clothed  in 
scarlet,  and  sitting  on  a scarlet- colored  beast. 

Red  was  the  distinguishing  color  of  kings,  princes,  and 
rich  men ; it  is  still  the  color  of  the  Sovereign  Pontiff  and 
his  Cardinals,  who  are  clothed  entirely  in  it,  even  from  their 
hats  to  their  very  shoes. 

It  is  the  chief  prized  color  of  all  savages,  and  Maori 
tradition  records,  that  when  they  came  from  Hawaiki,  they 
brought  a supply  of  hura  with  them,  that  they  might  not  be 
without  so  necessary  an  article. 


CARVED  BOX. 


ATENE,  ON  THE  WANGANUI  RIVER. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

WAKAPAKOKO— IMAGES. 

The  Maori  could  scarcely  be  said  to  be  idolators,  although 
they  certainly  had  idols,  yet  they  were  not  generally  wor- 
shipped, but  only  used  by  the  priests  as  adjuncts  to  their 
karakias. 

The  WakapaJcolco,  or  images,  thus  used,  were  little  more 
than  wooden  pegs  with  a distorted  figure  of  the  human  head 
carved  on  the  top ; these  were  about  eighteen  inches  long, 
the  other  end  was  pointed  so  that  they  could  be  stuck  in  the 
ground.  In  respect  to  idolatry,  the  Maori  differed  from 
almost  every  other  heathen  people,  in  not  having  the  images 
of  their  gods  of  gigantic  size,  by  which  it  was  thought  the 
greater  terror  would  be  excited,  from  their  superior  strength 
thus  denoted,  distorted  features  and  huge  dimensions  pour- 
traying  their  supposed  powers  ; but  this  was  not  so  with 
the  Maori,  they  seemed  to  have  a more  spiritual  idea  of  their 
gods ; the  only  exception,  a large  human  figure  over  the 
chief  entrance  of  the  Ohine  Mutu  pa  at  Rotorua,  the  door 

p 2 


212 


WAKAPAKOKO IMAGES. 


being  between  the  legs  of  the  figure,  but  this  was  not  an  idol, 
merely  a figure  to  strike  terror  in  the  enemy.  These  images 
were  only  thought  to  possess  virtue  or  peculiar  sanctity  from 
the  presence  of  the  god  they  represented  when  dressed  up 
for  worship ; at  other  times  they  were  regarded  only  as  bits 
of  ordinary  wood. 

This  dressing  consisted  in  the  first  place  of  the  rpahau , or 
beard,  which  was  made  by  a fringe  of  the  bright  red  feathers 
of  the  ] kaka,  parrot, — next  of  the  peculiar  cincture  of  sacred 
cord  with  which  it  was  bound ; this  mystic  bandage  was  not 
only  tied  on  in  a peculiar  way  by  the  priest,  who  uttered 
his  most  powerful  spells  all  the  time  he  was  doing  it,  but 
also  whilst  he  was  twisting  the  cord  itself,  and  lastly, 
painting  the  entire  figure  with  the  sacred  kura ; this  com- 
pleted the  preparation  for  the  reception  of  the  god  who 
was  by  these  means  constrained  to  come  and  take  up  his 
abode  in  it  when  invoked.  But  the  presence  of  the  atua  was 
not  supposed  to  be  confined  to  these  images,  he  more 
frequently  took  up  his  abode  in  the  priest  himself,  who,  when 
thus  filled  with  his  spirit,  was  so  violently  distorted  in  all  his 
limbs,  so  frantic  in  his  movements,  foaming  at  his  mouth  as 
to  appear  filled  with  the  god,  and  no  longer  the  master  of  his 
own  actions,  his  body  was  then  entirely  surrendered  to  him ; 
every  word  he  uttered  whilst  in  that  state  was  regarded  as 
proceeding  from  the  god,  and  not  from  himself ; this  was 
thought  to  be  the  case  after  uttering  certain  karakias,  at 
other  times  he  was  only  an  ordinary  person. 

When  the  chief  wanted  to  carry  any  measure  which  he 
felt  he  had  not  sufficient  influence  to  do  by  his  own  mana, 
or  power,  he  usually  called  in  the  aid  of  the  tohunga,  who 
not  only  managed  to  be  inspired  when  thus  wanted,  but  to 
utter  just  what  agreed  with  his  chief’s  wish,  which  coming 
direct  from  the  atua  at  once  convinced  the  people. 

The  ariki,  or  head  chief,  in  virtue  of  his  office  and  position 
was  likewise  thought  able  to  hold  converse  with  his  deified 
ancestors ; there  appears  to  be  some  similarity  between  him 
and  the  high  priest  under  the  Mosaic  Law,  in  being  a tem- 
poral as  well  as  spiritual  ruler ; thus  after  the  election  of  a 


WAKAPAKOKO — IMAGES. 


213 


king  there  were  two  rulers — one  the  head  of  the  State,  the 
other  of  the  Church.  The  king  was  still  however  a sacred 
character,  David  wore  the  ephod,  Solomon  offered  up  prayer 
for  Israel  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple. 

After  the  Captivity  the  two  offices  were  again  united 
in  the  same  person,  whilst  the  regal  power  remained  in 
the  family  of  the  Maccabees.  In  the  Lama  and  the  Pope 
we  see  this  union  continued,  whilst  in  Japan  the  Mikado 
and  Tirkoon  are  spiritual  and  temporal  heads,  so  in  the 
Tonga  Isles  until  they  were  separated,  but  both  are  now 
united  in  the  Ariki.  Amongst  the  Maori,  the  number  of 
high  chiefs  being  greater,  the  power  of  any  single  individual 
is  of  course  only  in  proportion  to  his  temporal  position 
amongst  his  confreres. 

The  reverence  for  the  head  seems  to  have  some  connection 
with  that  for  the  ariki.  The  head  of  the  person,  as  well  as 
the  head  of  the  tribe,  was  sacred ; nothing  common  could 
touch  it. 

To  return  to  the  subject  of  idols.  The  chief  use  to  which 
they  were  devoted  was  to  render  sacred  their  plantations  ; 
the  image  was  stuck  in  the  ground  and  powerful  spells 
uttered  to  make  the  men  sacred,  that  none  of  those  em- 
ployed should  leave  the  work  before  it  was  finished,  pass 
over,  or  even  enter  them,  except  for  their  cultivation.  This 
was  done  at  the  tokcinga,  or  planting ; the  ceremony  was 
again  repeated  when  the  kumara  began  to  grow,  and  again 
at  the  hauhaJcenga , or  in-gathering.  Certain  stones,  or 
tuahu,  had  offerings  of  the  liver  of  the  first  killed  in  battle 
placed  upon  them. 

There  was  also  a household  god,  an  image  in  the  form 
of  an  infant,  which  belonged  solely  to  females  ; this  was 
nursed  by  those  who  were  barren,  as  if  it  were  a baby, 
to  remove  the  reproach  ; it  was  made  with  great  care, 
and  generally  as  large  as  a child,  adorned  with  the 
family  jewels,  and  the  same  garments  which  they  usually 
wear,  and  was  addressed  in  the  same  endearing  terms, 
but  no  religious  rites  were  used.  Thompson,  in  his  work 
entitled,  “ The  Law  and  the  Book,”  has  a passage  which 


214 


WAKAPAKOKO IMAGES. 


seems  to  throw  light  on  this  singular  custom.  In  his  ac- 
count of  the  seraphim,  “ The  charge  of  stealing  Laban’s 
images  (Gren.  xxxi.  29)  is  the  earliest  distinct  notice  of  their 
existence  and  worship.  They  must  have  been  so  small 
as  to  be  easily  concealed  under  the  saddle  of  Rachel  • 
and,  by  the  way,  it  is  still  very  common  for  Arabs  to  hide 
stolen  property  under  the  padding  of  their  saddles.  They 
probably  resembled  the  small  images  of  saints  which  are  now 
carried  about  by  Oriental  Christians,  and  may  have  been 
honored  and  consulted  in  much  the  same  way  ; some  of 
these  saints  are  celebrated  for  assistance  given  to  women 
afflicted  with  Rachel’s  sorrow,  and  perhaps  she  herself  had 
been  driven  to  this  sort  of  idolatry  in  her  anxiety  to  become 
a mother.  It  would  be  orientally  feminine  in  an  eminent 
degree,  if  this  were  the  cause  of  her  stealing  her  father’s 
gods,  nor  does  the  act  of  stealing  a god  to  worship  strike 
these  people  about  us  as  monstrous  or  absurd.  I have 
known  many  such  thefts  of  modern  seraphim,  and  by  women 
too.” — (Page  370.) 

The  ancient  Hindus,  according  to  the  Rig  Yeda,  had  only 
similar  idols  when  it  was  written. 


BASKET  WITH  GODS. 


-_3- 


A VIEW  OF  THE  REINGA. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

SINGULAR  RITES,  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


The  Rakau  Tapu,  sacred  tree,  or  religion  of  tlie  Nga-ti- 
rua-nui,  had  several  singular  rites  connected  with  it  ; of 
such  were  their  grand  sacrifices.  The  Pouwhiro,  High 
priest,  or  chief  ariki,  stood  before  the  sacred  wata  or 
stage,  on  which  the  offerings  were  placed. 

There  were  three  kinds  of  these  stages.  The  first  was  He 
wata  wakaairo,  which  was  carved  and  highly  ornamented. 
This  was  the  principal  one,  and  was  called  he  Paiahua,  the 
beautiful.  The  second  was  called  Te  Witipana , the  power 
of  warding  off  evil.  The  third  was  named  Pou  Wakaturia, 
the  enduring  post.  The  Pouwhiro  stood  before  the  sacred 
stage,  generally  in  a state  of  nudity,  holding  in  his  hand  a 
carved  tokotoko,  staff,  with  a grotesque  human  figure  on  the 
top,  similar  to  those  on  an  ornamented  hoe.  This  tokotoko 
waka  airo  he  stuck  in  the  ground  by  his  side ; whilst  uttering 
his  karakia  no  one  came  near  him,  he  stood  in  th£*  most 


216 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


holy  place.  Between  him  and  the  Tauira  was  he  arai  o te 
wahi  tapu,  a fence  of  the  sacred  place,  then  beyond  that 
another,  to  separate  the  Tauira  from  the  chiefs  and  other 
worshippers ; this  space  was  called  he  pahiko , and  beyond 
it  the  sacred  food  was  eaten,  the  priests  taking  a portion 
to  each  chief,  which  they  say  resembled  our  sacrament,  for 
the  priests  first  partook  of  it  themselves.  The  following 
was  the  order  : — 


1.  The  Paiahu,  . ..  _ 

2.  The  Witi  Pana,  The  sta«es’  or  altars’  the  first 

0 rm  ^ , , . being  in  the  centre. 

3.  The  Pon  waka  turia,  D 

4.  The  Pon  whiro,  high  priest,  with  his  staff  and  tokotoko. 

5.  The  fence  of  the  most  sacred  spot. 

6.  The  Tauira,  inferior  priests,  in  the  Pahiko. 

7.  The  outer  fence. 

8.  The  chiefs  and  body  of  worshippers. 


The  high  priest  first  uttered  his  karakia  taro,  beginning — 
Karikari  ki  te  uru  o Kongo, 

Uenuku  mawaka  rere,  &c.,  &c. 


Then  the  entire  body 
their  karakia  standing  in 
Ka  mata  mai  te  riri, 

Ka  mata  mai  te  nguha, 
Ka  mata  mai  te  patu, 

Ka  mata  mai  te  hoa, 

Ka  mata  mai  te  tuatau, 
Taumaha  ka  manamaina. 
He  karakia  mo  te 
The  prayer  of  the 


of  Tauira  or  priests  followed  with 
the  Pahiko. 

Give  force  to  the  anger, 

Give  force  to  the  flame, 

Give  force  to  the  blow, 

Give  force  to  the  friend, 

Give  force  to  the  whole, 

Many  strengthen  the  spell, 
kainga  noho  anga  pahiko. 
priests  of  the  pahiko. 


The  sacred  food  was  usually  cooked  in  three  ovens,  a small 
one  for  the  god,  the  next  for  the  priest,  the  third  and  the 
largest  for  the  worshippers ; but  in  this  case  there  were  three 
besides  that  for  the  atua,  the  high  priest  having  his  own, 
the  inferior  priests  of  the  Pahiko  theirs,  and  the  general 
body  of  worshippers  one  large  one ; this  form  of  worship 
belonged  to  the  Nga-ti-rua-nui ; these  ovens  were  made 
in  the  space  beyond  the  Pahiko. 

The  customs  relating  to  the  Dead  varied  in  almost  every 


EITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


217 


part  of  tlie  island,  as  did  also  tlie  ideas  entertained  of  their 
state  after  death. 

The  interment  of  the  dead  was  considered  a duty  of  the 
highest  importance,  especially  that  of  the  chiefs ; as  for  poor 
slaves,  little  thought  was  bestowed  upon  them ; they  were 
buried  or  not,  according  to  circumstances  ; the  master 
generally  contrived  to  save  the  body  from  being  lost  by 
eating  it ; when  by  any  chance  one  came  to  a natural  end  if 
the  corpse  laid  in  a spot  where  it  was  not  offensive  to  the 
living,  there  it  was  left ; if  otherwise,  a hole  was  dug,  and  it 
was  thrown  into  it ; but  when  a chief  died,  the  mournful  event 
was  immediately  made  known  ; a loud  howl  or  wail  brought 
all  the  neighbours  together,  who  joined  in  the  doleful  cry. 
The  wives  and  near  relations,  especially  the  female  ones, 
testified  their  grief  by  cutting  the  face  and  forehead  with 
shells  or  pieces  of  obsidian,  until  the  blood  flowed  plenti- 
fully, suffering  the  streamlets  to  dry  on  the  face,  and  the 
more  perfectly  it  was  covered  with  clotted  gore  the  greater 
the  proof  of  their  respect  for  the  dead ; the  hair  was  always 
cut  as  a sign  of  grief,  the  men  generally  cut  it  only  on  one 
side,  from  the  forehead  to  the  neck.  Since  the  introduc- 
tion of  guns,  the  custom  of  firing  has  been  adopted,  as 
a powerful  aid  to  the  human  voice,  in  testifying  sorrow  for 
the  dead ; a native  has  no  idea  of  silent  grief ; the  greater 
the  noise,  the  greater  the  sorrow,  and  the  longer  it  is  kept 
up,  the  greater  the  honor  paid,  every  friend  or  relative  shows 
his  respect  for  the  dead,  by  the  number  of  guns  discharged ; 
this  is  called  he  maimai  aroha. 

One  of  the  first  things  was  to  make  the  kaheru,  or  spade,  for 
digging  the  grave  when  such  was  needed,  this  was  rendered 
sacred  by  the  karakias  which  were  repeated*  whilst  it  was 


* The  karakia  used  on  this  occasion,  is  a very  long  one  ; the  following  is 
the  commencement  : — 

Ko  pi  ko  pa  hua  te  ata,  Closed  up,  closed  up, 

Ka  kai  e,  i nga,  (In  the  womb  of  night.) 

Kainga  ngaki  o te  With  the  early  dawn, 

Matua,  i waiho  Eat  the  sacrifice  of  the  dead, 

I te  ao  nei,  From  the  cultivation  of  your  father, 

Ko  pi  ko  pa  hua  te  Which  is  left  in  the  world. 

Ata,  ka  kai-e-,  Closed  up,  closed  up, 


218 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


being  made,  and  until  the  interment,  the  body  laid  in  state, 
dressed  out.  in  the  finest  mats,  and  ornamented  with  feathers, 
the  mere,  gun,  and  spear  being  placed  by  its  side.  In  some 
parts  the  grave  was  dug  in  the  house  of  the  deceased,  in 
which  the  body  was  placed  in  a sitting  posture,  the  limbs 
being  retained  in  that  position  by  bandages,  still  dressed  in 
the  best  garments,  adorned  with  the  family  ornaments  of 
green-stone  and  sharks  teeth  ; it  was  then  wrapped  up  in 
a fine  sleeping  mat,  and  the  grave  covered  over  with  planks 
and  a little  soil ; it  is  still  usual  to  inter  the  property  of  the 
chief  with  him,  especially  all  things  which  have  touched  his 
person  during  his  illness,  such  as  garments,  &c. 

In  former  times,  one  or  more  of  the  chiefs  wives  would 
strangle  themselves  to  accompany  and  wait  upon  their  lord 
in  the  other  world ; for  this  purpose,  also,  several  slaves 
were  killed,  that  the  chief  might  not  be  without  attendants ; 
sometimes  the  chief  wife  would  have  her  husband^  head  cut 
off  and  dried,  and  always  sleep  with  it  by  her  side. 

In  other  places,  the  body  was  put  into  a kind  of  frame, 


A FRAME  TO  DEPOSIT  CORPSES  IN  UNTIL  DECOMPOSED. 


E hinu  ra,  he  taro  ra, 

Ko  te  kai,  kai  namu 
Ai,  kia  wangai  ia, 

Kai  namu  ki  Pai-rau  ra, 

&c.,  &c. 

Even  Christian  natives  regard  the  spade  used  in  digging  a grave  as  being 
tapu,  and  do  not  like  to  use  it  again,  except  for  the  same  purpose. 


In  early  dawn, 

Eat  the  spirit  of  the  fat,  the  taro, 
Your  food  to  feed  you  is  the  fly, 
Eat  it  in  Pairau  your  abode. 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD.  219 

formed  by  two  pieces  of  an  old  canoe,  standing  about  six 
feet  high,  and  forming  a hollow  place,  in  which  the  corpse 
was  seated  on  a grating,  to  allow  the  flesh,  as  it  decomposed, 
to  fall  through  ; after  a certain  time  the  skeleton  was 
removed,  and  the  bones  scraped,  this  was  the  Ngapuhi  cus- 
tom. In  the  south,  where  the  body  was  interred,  the  first 
rukutanga  tupajoaku , or  digging  up  of  the  corpse,  took  place 
about  four  weeks  after  the  nehunga,  or  burial,  when  a feast 
was  made  by  the  relations  and  friends  of  the  deceased;  on 
this  occasion  the  tohunga  extracted  two  or  more  molar 
teeth  of  the  corpse,  which  he  tied  to  a small  stick  or  fern 
stalk,  and  laid  upon  the  food,  which  was  prepared  for  the 
oven,  this  was  called  te  umu  o te  pera,  or  the  oven  of  the 
putrified  flesh.*  The  first  oven  was  tapued  for  the  tohunga ; 
the  second  for  the  guests  ; while  the  teeth  laid  on  the  food, 
a long  karakia  was  repeated  over  them  ; afterwards  the 
ornaments  of  the  corpse,  which  had  been  buried  with  it, 
consisting  of  shark's  teeth  or  green  stone,  were  removed, 
and  worn  by  the  relatives,  for  the  ceremony  appears  to  have 
been  chiefly  intended  to  wakanoa,  or  take  off  the  tapu  from 
the  body,  that  the  ornaments  might  be  again  used ; when 
the  ceremony  was  over  the  teeth  were  bored,  and  worn  as 
ear  ornaments  by  the  nearest  relative  ; the  body  was  then 
wrapped  up  in  a fine  mat,  and  re-interred. 

After  two  years  the  bones  were  again  dug  up  ; this  was 
called  te  Ruku-tanga  tuarua,  or  the  ivakanoa-tanga  tuarua, 
when  the  hahunga,  or  scrapiug  of  the  bones,  took  place ; 
this  being  considered  an  indispensable  duty  to  the  remains 
of  chiefs  ; all  the  friends  and  relatives  of  the  dead  were  sum- 
moned to  assist,  and  a great  feast  given  on  the  occasion  ; 
the  bones  when  scraped  were  painted  red,  and  ornamented 
with  feathers,  they  were  then  carefully  wrapped  up  in  a fine 
mat,  which  was  also  surrounded  with  several  others;  this 
being  done,  the  sacred  bundle  was  deposited  in  a small  canoe, 
which  was  elevated  on  a pole,  or  in  a miniature  house,  simi- 
larly raised  up,  or  else  the  bones  were  carried  to  the  top  of 
some  sacred  tree,  and  there  left  on  a small  stage  ; sometimes 


* Psalm  cviii.  28 — “ And  ate  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead. 


220 


EITES  AND  CUSTOMS  EELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


they  were  put  in  a hollow  trunk;  or  conveyed  to  a cave  or 
fissure  of  the  rocks,  where  they  were  finally  left ; but  it  was 
not  uncommon  to  burn  them,  when  that  was  done,  it  was 
called  the  tahunga,  or  burning. 

When  a person  died;  food  was  placed  by  his  side;  and 
some  also  with  him  in  the  grave;  as  it  was  supposed  the  spirit 
of  the  deceased  fed  on  the  spirit  of  the  food. 

At  Taranaki  the  child  of  a chief  was  buried  in  the  whare 
ta'pUj  i.e.j  its  father’s  house;  in  the  middle  of  which  a grave 
was  dug;  and  covered  over  with  boards,  on  which  the  family 
slept,  the  child  had  a taro  placed  in  each  hand,  so  that  if  he 
descended  into  the  Reinga,  he  might  have  food  ; when  the 
relatives  thought  that  the  body  was  sufficiently  decomposed, 
they  dug  it  up  and  scraped  the  bones,  which  were  placed  in 
an  ornamented  basket,  and  suspended  from  the  ridge-pole 
of  the  mahau,  or  verandah,  and  from  time  to  time  the  priest 
karakied  over  them,  to  assist  the  soul  in  ascending  through 
the  different  heavens,  if  it  did  not  reach  the  eighth  heaven, 
its  abode  was  not  very  comfortable  ; the  tenth  was  regarded 
as  the  chief  residence  of  the  gods  ; every  prayer  uttered 
over  the  bones  was  supposed  to  aid  the  soul  in  its  ascent ; 
when  asked  why  they  placed  the  taro  in  the  hands,  if 
they  thought  the  soul  ascended  to  heaveu,  the  reply  was, 
they  were  not  sure  whether  it  ascended  or  descended; 
they  knew  the  body  descended,  and  thought  it  probable 
the  soul  did  the  same ; therefore  a seed  taro  was  placed  in 
the  grave,  that,  should  such  be  the  case,  they  might  be  right 
both  ways ; many  of  the  Taranaki  natives,  however,  had  no 
faith  either  in  the  ascending  or  descending  of  spirits  :*  they 
thought  the  dead  always  remained  near  the  bodies,  that  the 


* Whakaeke,  a karakia  to  facilitate  the  ascent  of  the  spirit  : — 


I ei ! tena  te  huri, 

Te  huri  ka  whakarawe, 
Te  huri  e whano  ai  koe, 
Ki  to  tini, 

Ki  to  mano, 

Ki  to  kauariki, 
Whakairi  atu, 

To  ara  ki  te  rangi. 


Alas  ! this  is  the  turning  over, 
The  severing  the  link  of  life. 
The  turning  over  that  you 
May  join  the  many, 

The  multitude, 

The  ariki  gone  before. 

Ascend  the  road 
To  heaven. 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


221 


sacred  grove  in  which  they  were  interred,  was  filled  with 
their  spirits,  and  if  a person  died  a violent  death,  he  wan- 
dered about  until  the  priest,  by  his  spells,  brought  his  spirit 
within  the  enclosure. 

When  a chief  was  killed  in  battle,  and  eaten,  his  spirit 
was  supposed  to  enter  the  stones  of  the  oven,  with  which 
his  body  had  been  cooked,  which  retained  their  heat  so  long 
as  it  remained  in  them ; his  friends  repeated  their  most 
powerful  spells  to  draw  his  spirit  out  of  the  stones,  and  bring 
it  within  the  wahi  tapu ; for  it  was  thought  otherwise  it 
could  not  rest,  but  would  wander  about  inflicting  injury 
on  the  living,  all  spirits  being  considered  maliciously  in- 
clined towards  them ; so  when  any  were  slain  in  battle,  if 
the  body  could  not  be  obtained,  the  friends  endeavoured  to 
procure  some  of  the  blood,  or  fragments  of  their  garments, 
over  which  they  uttered  a karakia,  and  thus  brought  the 
wandering  soul  within  this  spiritual  fold ; these  places  are  still 
looked  upon  with  much  fear,  as  the  spirits  are  thought  occa- 
sionally to  wander  from  them,  and  cause  sickness.  In  them 
the  tuahu,  or  native  altar,  the  toko  and  pataka,  or  stage 
for  offerings  to  the  gods,  were  placed  : it  was  thought  to  be 
extremely  dangerous  for  the  living  to  enter  either  them  or 
the  houses  where  the  dead  were  buried ; in  almost  every  pa 
nearly  half  the  houses  belonged  to  the  dead ; these  being 
in  every  stage  of  decay  had  a very  unsightly  appearance ; 
the  tohunga  cut  off  the  hair  of  the  relatives,  and  cast  it  into 
the  fire ; fern  root  was  eaten  in  the  morning.  Kainga  i te 
ata  te  aruhi. 

When  friends  arrive  at  a pa,  it  is  customary  for  them  to 
cry  over  all  those  who  have  died  since  they  were  last  there. 
They  wore  a pare  or  taua,  chaplet  of  green  branches,  or  of  a 
beautiful  lycopodium ; one  of  the  elder  females  of  the  party, 
who  acts  as  chief  mourner  for  the  occasion,  has  a chaplet  of 
dog;s  hair  round  her  temples,  sometimes  it  is  very  tastefully 
made  of  a kind  of  black  sea- weed  ; they  then  present  them- 
selves before  the  house  of  the  dead,  and  begin  the  wail  in  a 
low  plaintive  tone ; the  lady,  who  leads  the  ceremonies, 
throwing  about  her  arms,  and  slowly  raising  her  head  and 


222 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


eyes  to  heaven,  then  casting  them  down  again,  and  crossing 
her  arms  over  her  breast ; until  a person  is  accustomed  to 
these  scenes,  he  can  scarcely  refrain  from  weeping,  it  ap- 
pears so  natural,  and  the  wail  seems  to  come  from  the 
very  bottom  of  the  soul.  The  virtues  of  the  dead  are 
repeated,  and  the  following  lament  is  used  on  such  occa- 
sions : for  a male — He takxi  makawe hi. 

Alas,  the  covering  or  glory  of  my  head,  alas.  For  a female 
— Haere  e hine  e wax  i te  ara  o tupuna,  Ida  karanga  nui  wui 

kei  o kui ha,  kei  o matua , hei  karanga  max  ki  a koe. 

Go,  0 lady,  pursue  the  path  of  your  ancestors ; call  loudly 
to  your  female  and  male  ancestors,  they  summon  you. 


He  pihi  mo  nga  Tupapaku. 
Taku  hei*  he  piripiri, 
Taku  hei  mokimoki, 
Taku  hei  tawiri 
Taku  kati  taramea, 

Te  hei  o te  pounamu, 

I haramai  ai  — e, 

I runga  te  angai-ia-ana. 


A lament  for  the  dead. 

My  fragrant  bundle  the  piripiri, 
My  fragrant  bundle  the  mokimoki, 
My  fragrant  bundle  the  tataka, 
My  sweet  juice  of  the  taramea, 
The  companion  of  the  green-stone, 
Is  gone — alas,  upon 
The  angai  — e — . 


The  tangi,  or  wail,  was  not  confined  to  the  dead ; when- 
ever friends  met,  it  was  raised,  they  cried  over  each  other ; 
this  ancient  custom  probably  arose  from  the  insecurity  of 
life  in  former  days ; those  who  had  escaped  from  their  con- 
stant fights,  when  they  met,  wept  as  though  they  had  been 
dead  : even  we  sometimes  cry  for  joy,  at  seeing  a dear 
friend,  relative,  or  child,  who  has  had  any  great  deliver- 
ance from  danger;  the  custom  naturally  becomes  general 
amongst  a savage  and  warlike  race,  like  that  of  the  Maori. 

When  the  dead  were  buried,  the  following  pihi  was  used, 
by  the  side  of  a running  stream,  in  which  the  staff  of  death 
was  stuckf  : — 


* The  hei  was  a little  scent  bag  or  bundle  tied  to  a string  and  worn  round 
the  neck. 

f The  priest  had  two  tokos  or  staffs,  one  for  life  the  other  for  death,  or,  as 
they  are  expressively  said,  one  for  the  po  and  the  other  for  the  ao , these  were 
stuck  up  in  a wahi  tapu,  and  when  he  was  consulted  respecting  the  recoveiy 
of  the  sick,  he  visited  these  tokos  until  he  perceived  the  Wairua , or  spirit, 


KITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


223 


Toko  kai  i te  po, 

Te  po  nui, 

Te  po  roa, 

Te  po  uriuri, 

Te  po  tangotango, 

Te  po  wawa, 

Te  po  te  kitea, 

Te  po  te  waia, 

Tena  toko  ka  tu, 

Ko  toko  o Tane  rua  nuku. 


Place  a staff  for  the  night, 
The  great  night, 

The  long  night, 

The  dark  night, 

The  gloomy  night, 

The  intense  night, 

The  unseen  night, 

The  unsearchable  night. 
Behold  the  staff  stands, 

The  staff  of  Tane  rua  nuku. 


This  was  followed  by  one  for  the  living.  Another  staff 
was  then  stuck  in  the  water,  and  the  priest  said  : — 


Toko  kai  te  ao, 

Te  ao  nui,  te  ao  roa, 

Te  ao  marama, 

Te  ao  whekere, 

Tena  toko  katu, 

Ko  toko  Ikurangi, 

Ko  toko  te  wai  ao, 

Ko  toko  te  ao  marama, 
Oti  mai  ki  te  ao. 


Place  a staff  for  the  day, 

The  great  day,  the  long  day, 
The  bright  day, 

The  gloomy  day. 

Behold  the  staff  stands, 

The  staff  of  the  tail  of  heaven, 
The  staff  of  flowing  light, 

The  staff  of  the  bright  world, 
This  is  all  for  the  day. 


The  number  of  ceremonies  observed  on  the  death  of  a 
chief  were  extraordinary,  they  commenced  immediately  the 
breath  went  out  of  the  body. 

Mo  te  hemonga  o te  Twpapaku. 

1.  Ka  Takaia , for  the  binding  up  of  the  corpse ; the 
karakia  used  is  that  beginning  : — 

Ko  te  noti,  ko  te  noti,  The  tying,  the  tying, 

Ko  te  here,  ko  te  here,  The  binding,  the  binding, 

Nawai  rahe  kaha  nei  ? &c.  Who  is  able  to  do  it  ? &c. 


2.  Mo  te  Whakawahanga  ki  te  tuara , for  the  carrying  the 
corpse  on  the  shoulders  : — 


which  caused  the  malady  ; if  the  spirit  alighted  on  the  staff  of  life  the  sick 
recovered,  but  if  on  the  other  he  died,  unless  the  priest  could  succeed  in 
spearing  the  spirit,  which  sometimes  he  professed  to  do,  then  the  sick 
recovered  ; how  this  feat  was  accomplished  the  narrator  could  not  tell. 


2£4  RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


E Tu,  E Kongo,  naumai, 
E waha  e waha, 

I taku  tna  no  wai 
Te  kawe  mai,  &c. 


0 Tn,  0 Rongo,  welcome, 

Bear  0 bear 

Upon  my  shoulders, 

Of  whom  is  the  carrying,  &c, 


3.  When  they  have  gone  and  are  near  to  the  sacred 
grove,  or  place,  if  by  the  road  of  the  spider,*  or  if  to  a cave 
there  is  a particular  karakia  for  each,  but  if  a lifting  up  on  a 
stage  or  amongst  the  branches,  there  is  another ; this  is  for 
the  latter  : — • 

Tena  te  ara  te  ara  ka  iri,  This  is  the  way,  the  way,  lift 

it  up, 

Ko  te  ara  o tenei  aitu  The  way  of  this  calamity, 

Ara  ko  i runga,  &c.  The  road  above. 

4.  If  water  be  near  the  sacred  grove,  the  bearers,  though 
they  be  twenty  in  number,  must  dip  their  bodies  in  it.  This 
is  the  karakia  : — 

Tangaroa  mea  i rukuhia,  Tangaroa  says  you  must  dip, 

I oko  whatitahuri  iho,  &c. 

I a Rongo,  ka  mau  te  whatu, 

Mai  tai  i tap  a rere,  &c. 


5.  When  they  have  come  out  of  the  water  they  must 
stand  on  the  side,  the  twenty  in  a row,  with  a branch  in 
each  of  their  hands.  This  is  the  karakia  of  the  priest  : — 


Ka  mama  te  rangi  tuatahi, 

Ka  mama  te  rangi  tuarua, 

Ka  mama  te  rangi  tuatoru,  &c. 
Tena  te  umu  te  umu  ka  wan- 
gai,  &c. 


Let  the  ascent  to  the  first  heaven 
be  easy, 

Let  the  ascent  to  the  second  hea- 
ven be  easy, 

This  is  the  oven,  the  oven  to  feed 
the  spirit. 


The  second  part — 

After  a period  of  two  or  three  years  the  hahunga,  or 
exhuming  of  the  corpse  took  place,  when  the  bones  were 
scraped,  painted,  wrapped  up  in  a fine  mat,  and  placed  in 
a small  canoe  upon  the  top  of  a pole. 


* A spider’s  thread  is  supposed  to  be  the  soul’s  road  to  heaven. 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD.  225 

6.  In  taking  up  the  skeleton,  the  person  whose  office  it 
was  to  exhume  it  walked  first,  the  priest  followed  and  ut- 
tered this  karakia  : — 

Tena  te  ara,  te  ara  kaheheu  This  is  the  road, 

Te  ara  o tenei  ara  punga-  This  the  concealed  way, 
werewere,  &c.  The  way  of  the  spider. 

7.  Haying  arrived  at  the  entrance  of  the  cave  the  staff 
of  the  exhumer  was  stuck  in  the  stones,  or  whatever  it  might 
be,  and  this  karakia  uttered  : — 

Tn  te  rou  roua,  Tu  the  searcher, 

Roua  ki  whiti,  Search  out  the  bones,  &c. 

Roua  ki  Tonga,  &c. 

8.  When  the  bones  were  taken  up  this  karakia  was 
said : — 

Kohikohi  nga  iwi  o Tane  Rua  Gather  up  the  bones  of  Tane 
nuku,  Rua  nuku, 

He  Ariki  ka  whano  ki  te  A Lord  will  go  to  the  opening 
wheiao,  day,  to  the  bright  world. 

Te  ao  marama,  &c. 

9.  When  they  were  placed  in  the  bag  this  karakia  was 
used  : 

Ko  te  noti,  ko  te  noti,  ko  te  The  tying,  the  tying,  the  bind- 
here,  &c.  ing,  the  binding,  &c. 

When  that  was  finished  then  the  former  one  : — • 

E Tu,  e Rongo  nau  mai  e wa  whenua. 

10.  Then  the  bearer  had  to  bathe,  when  the  twenty 
arrived  at  the  dwelling-place  they  turned  round  and  took 
the  skeleton  from  his  back,  repeating  this  karakia : — 

Amio  te  ariki,  amio  i Rangi-  Turn  round  the  Lord, 
kapiti, 

Amio  i Rangi  Kataurua,  Turn  round  him, 

Amio  i te  aotea,  te  peka  Who  has  returned  from  Rangi 
te  peka,  reremai,  &c.  Kapiti,  &c. 

Kura  e Hotu  te  uniko  i runga, 

Ka  kitea  te  peka  waka  te  waka  hao  ra  o te  ipo, 
end  of  last  karakia. 

Q 


226 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


1] . Then  the  bag  was  placed  on  the  ground  : — 

Tukua  Rangi  ko  ta  taua  mea,  &c., 

0 Heaven  release  our  common  property. 

12.  Then  the  bundle  was  untied,  and  this  said  : — 

Ko  Ruru  maweti,  ko  Ruru  mawete, 

Ko  mea  irikura  iri  toro. 

13.  Then  the  bones  were  anointed  with  oil. 

Homai  he  hinu  tapeka  lmra  Rakeia 
Ki  te  hau,  tapeka  kura,  homai  o 
Taonga  tapeka  kura,  &c. 

14.  Then  they  made  the  canoe,  repeating  its  proper 
karakia 

To  waka,  whaka  tere  tere,  to  waka  uakina,  Ranga  mai  hea  te 
taka  pau  tukua  iho,  &c. 

Thy  canoe,  thy  swift  canoe,  &c. 

Mo  te  whaka  ngoi  ngoi.  For  the  making  strong. 

Kei  to  kakahu  ra,  ko  te  hara,  kei  to  heru  ra  ko  te  hara,  uru 
atea,  uru  wetea  wetea  te  whiwhi. 

15.  And,  lastly,  raising  the  canoe  on  the  pole  : — 

Tena  te  ara,  te  ara  ka  iri,  te  ara  o Tane, 

Tane  i te  Pu,  Tane  i te  waka,  Tane  i te  Tamore, 

Tangaroa  hakehake,  Tena  te  ara. 


When  the  person-  was  at  the  point  of  death  the  legs  were 
bent,  and  the  body  rolled  up  in  its  garment,  and  placed  in  a 
sitting  posture. 

After  it  had  been  properly  prepared  it  was  laid  in  state 
for  a certain  time,  when  the  usual  wailing  had  taken  place, 
the  corpse  was  carried  to  its  grave,  or  placed  in  the  fork  of 
some  tree,  and  the  party  returned.  Having  reached  the 
water  a pole  was  stuck  in  it  for  the  dead,  and  the  priest 
uttered  the  following  prayer  : — 

Plant  food  for  Hades,  or  night,  Toko  kai  mo  te  Po, 

The  great  night,  &c.,  Te  po  nui, 

Te  po  roa, 

Te  po  uri  uri, 

Te  po  tango  tango* 


The  long  night, 

The  long,  long  night, 
The  night  to  be  touched, 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


227 


The  night  to  be  felt, 

The  night  not  be  seen, 

The  night  to  be  followed, 
Plant  the  pole,  it  stands. 
The  pole  of  Tane  Rua  nuku, 
The  pole  of  night, 

This  is  all  for  the  night. 


Te  po  wawa, 

Te  po  te  kitea, 

Te  po  te  waia, 

Tena  toko  ka  tn, 

Ko  toko  o Tane  Rua  nuku, 
Ko  toko  o te  po, 

Oti  atu  ki  te  po. 


When  the  karakia  for  the  dead  was  finished,  then  another 
pole  for  the  living  and  the  world,  was  stuck  in  the  water 
and  this  karakia  was  uttered. 


Plant  food  for  the  world,  or 
day, 

The  great  day, 

The  long  day, 

The  gloomy  day, 

The  clouded  day, 

The  swelling  day. 

Now  plant  the  pole,  it  stands, 
The  pole  of  Tane, 

The  pole  of  the  tail  of  heaven, 
The  pole  of  following  day, 
The  pole  of  day  is  planted, 
This  is  all  for  the  day, 

For  the  living  this  pole. 


Toko  kai  mo  te  ao, 

Te  ao  nui, 

Te  ao  roa, 

Te  ao  pouri, 

Te  ao  potango, 

Te  ao  wa  tuma, 

Tena  toko,  ka  tu, 

Ko  toko  o Tane, 

Ko  toko  o Hikurangi, 

Ko  toko  te  wai  ao, 

Ka  toko  te  ao  marama, 

Oti  atu  ki  te  ao, 

Monga  tangata  ora  o tenei  toko. 


When  the  karakia  for  the  living  was  ended  and  they  had 
returned  to  the  village,  food  was  cooked  and  placed  on  the 
different  things  which  belonged  to  the  deceased.  This  was 
done  to  destroy  their  sanctity,  they  were  then  given  to  the 
relatives. 

If  the  deceased  chief  was  a very  great  one,  the  friends 
brought  what  is  called  a kopakij  or  koere , for  the  dead,  which 
was  a present,  or  as  it  is  expressed,  a covering  for  him.  It  con- 
sisted of  garments,  fine  mats,  dog  skin  cloaks,  green  stone 
ornaments,  or  canoes,  &c.  Sometimes  these  presents  were 
brought  before  the  interment,  in  that  case  they  were  piled  up 
in  a house  until  the  mourners  returned,  and  after  they  had 
been  in  the  water,  and  the  priest  had  uttered  the  karakia 
toko  koe  te  po,  &c.,  they  had  the  sacred  oven,  umu  ruku 

Q 2 


228 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


hctnga,  then  the  priest  took  off  the  tapu  from  the  presents, 
and  they  were  divided  amongst  the  relatives. 

There  was  still  another  covering  of  a similar  character 
given  when  the  Hahunga,  or  disinterment  took  place  ; 
the  same  ceremony  was  gone  through,  with  the  exception 
of  the  karakia  being  for  the  living,  Toko  koe  te  ao,  te  ao 
nui,  &c. 


THE  CARVING  ON  A TOMB,  REPRESENTING  THE  LIZARD  WHICH  CAUSES  DEATH. 


ATKNE  AND  ITS  TOMBS. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

SINGULAR  RITES,  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 

(continued.) 

The  New  Zealanders  had  various  ways  of  interring  their  dead 
which  have  been  already  alluded  to ; near  the  sea  side  it  is  a 
favorite  way  to  bury  them  in  sand  drifts  : scooping  out  a 
small  space,  and  keeping  the  dry  sand  from  falling  down  by 
a board,  until  the  corpse  is  placed  in  it,  then  by  withdrawing 
the  board  to  allow  the  sand  to  fall  down  and  cover  it,  leaving 
no  traces  of  its  locality.  It  is  now  customary  to  erect  very 
pretty  and  fanciful  buildings,  ornamenting  them  with  red 
ochre  and  feathers,  in  which  they  place  the  beloved  object. 


230  RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 

and  then  locking  the  door  throw  the  key  inside  the  fence, 
which  encircles  it : the  pots  and  vessels  belonging  to  the 
dead,  and  even  the  spade,  hammer  and  tools  used  in  erecting 
the  mausoleum  are  also  left  within  the  enclosure. 

The  favorite  way  is  to  select  some  conspicuous  mound, 
in  which  the  grave  is  dug,  or  the  mausoleum  erected,  this 
is  surrounded  by  a neat  paling,  painted  red,  the  earth  is 
then  cut  away,  so  as  to  leave  the  erection  like  a fortification, 
or  else  the  coffin  is  placed  on  the  top  of  the  mound,  and 
alternate  layers  of  fern  and  soil  built  over  it,  until  it  attains 
a height  of  six  or  eight  feet,  on  which  a railing  is  placed  ; 
these  tombs  are  both  conspicuous  and  picturesque.  A new 
fashion  now  prevails  of  erecting  the  frame  of  a small  house, 
and  covering  it  with  the  sheets  belonging  to  the  dead  ; now 
that  they  can  saw  timber  and  build  houses,  they  bestow 
much  labour  on  these  abodes  of  the  deceased. 

The  natives  are  very  particular  about  their  burial  grounds. 
I had  a number  of  mimosa  trees  planted  for  ornament 
amongst  the  graves;  when  in  flower  they  were  extremely 
beautiful,  and  even  the  natives  used  to  admire  them ; but 
when  I introduced  the  bee  that  industrious  little  insect  soon 
found  its  way  to  the  sacred  grove ; the  natives  also  were 
not  long  before  they  observed  it,  and  that  it  sacrilegiously 
feasted  upon  the  flowers ; they  complained  to  me  about  the 
bees,  gravely  saying,  they  fed  upon  the  flesh  of  the  dead  as 
the  trees  derived  their  substance  from  them,  and  therefore 
asked  me  to  have  them  cut  down.  I laughed  at  the  idea, 
and  tried  to  make  them  see  the  absurdity  of  their  wish, 
they  went  away  and  said  nothing ; but  some  time  after, 
when  I was  away  on  one  of  my  journeys,  they  availed  them- 
selves of  my  absence  to  do  it ; when  I returned  and 
beheld  the  unsightly  appearance,  the  dead  trees  scattered 
about  on  the  graves,  for  having  grown  there  they  were 
sacred  and  could  not  be  moved,  I felt  grieved  for  the 
loss  of  my  trees,  and  especially  at  their  having  "been  cut 
down  without  my  permission,  but  I knew  it  was  too  late 
to  say  anything,  and  if  I had  that  it  would  not  convince 
them  of  their  folly,  so  I took  no  notice  of  what  had  been 


BITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


231 


done,  but  when  the  time  for  taking  the  honey  arrived,  I 
sent  a large  piece  of  the  comb  to  each  of  those  who  had 
done  the  deed,  and  received  many  thanks  for  the  present ; 
and  a few  days  afterwards  I called  upon  them  to  know 
how  they  liked  the  honey,  they  all  said  it  was  excellent. 
I then  reminded  them  that  it  was  made  from  the  flowers  of 
the  mimosa  trees  they  had  cut  down,  and  consequently  from 
the  flesh  of  the  dead ; they  all  laughed  and  acknowledged 
their  foolishness,  saying,  I might  plant  as  many  more  as  I 
liked,  and  they  would  never  interfere  with  them  again. 

The  prevailing  idea  of  the  abode  of  spirits  was,  that  they 
went  to  the  Reinga,  which  is  another  name  for  Po  or  Hades  ; 
the  word  Reinga  literally  means,  the  leaping  place.  The 
spirits  were  supposed  to  travel  to  the  North  Cape,  or  land's 
end,  and  there  passing  over  a long  narrow  ledge  of  rock, 
leaped  down  upon  a flat  stone,  and  thence  slinging  them- 
selves into  the  water  by  some  long  sea-weed,  they  entered  Po, 
the  Reinga  being  the  passage  to  it  ;*  there  were  several  com- 
partments in  Hades,  each  having  its  own  name,  the  lowest 
being  the  worst,  had  no  light  or  food,  and  there  the  spirits 
gradually  pined  away,  and  were  finally  annihilated.  Spirits 
were  thought  to  require  food,  and  to  feed  upon  flies  and 
filth  ; but  they  had  also  the  spirit  of  the  kumara  and  taro  in 
the  highest  region  or  that  next  to  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Before  a soul  entered  the  Reinga,  it  had  to  pass  a river  called 
Waioratane,  the  keeper  of  which  placed  a plank  for  him  to  go 
over ; sometimes  he  would  not  do  so,  but  drove  him  back 
to  the  upper  regions,  with  friendly  violence,  to  take  care  of 
the  family  left  behind ; so,  likewise,  if  he  had  not  eaten  in 
the  Reinga,  he  might  return  to  the  earth.  If  a person 
recovered  from  a dangerous  disease,  or  anything  which 
threatened  life,  he  was  said  to  have  reached  Waioratane  and 
returned. 

* The  spirit  of  a person  who  resided  in  the  interior  generally  carried  with  it 
some  tohu  or  remembrance  of  the  part  it  came  from,  such  as  a leaf  of  the 
palm  tree  ; that  of  a person  on  the  coast  took  with  it  a kind  of  grass  which 
grows  by  the  sea  side.  A portion  of  these  tohus  were  left  at  its  different  rest- 
ing places  on  its  way  to  the  Reinga  ; these  little  bundles  of  leaves  so  left  were 
called  Waka  u’s.  A green  bundle  denotes  a recent  death. 


232 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


Whilst  the  heavens  increase  in  beauty  and  excellence  as 
they  ascend^  it  is  the  contrary  with  the  regions  of  Hades, 
each  one  in  descent  becomes  worse  than  the  preceding, 
the  lowest  is  worst  of  all,  there  it  is  po  rawa,  pitchy  dark- 
ness ; when  the  spirits  descended  to  that  dismal  region, 
where  there  was  neither  light  nor  food,  they  wasted  away 
and  ceased  to  exist;  this  lowest  pit  was  the  zero  of  the 
spiritual  thermometer,  it  gradually  ascended  to  the  earth 
and  thence  rose  to  the  heavens. 

Te  Rua  is  another  name  for  the  Reinga,  hua  hoki  mai  te 
ra  hi  te  Rua , the  sun  has  returned  to  the  pit,  or  set ; both  it 
and  the  moon  were  supposed  to  give  light  there,  but  it  was 
only  in  the  first  region  that  they  shone  clearly,  in  the  next 
compartment  they  had  only  reflected  light,  and  below  that 
the  same  again  once  removed,  thus  in  the  lowest  the  last 
glimmering  of  light  was  lost. 

One  of  the  most  recent  discoveries  of  the  day  is  what  has 
been  termed  heterogeny,  or  life,  under  one  form  or  another, 
evolved  from  decomposed  organic  matter  ; it  is  said  to 
be  nothing  new ; Plutarch  stated  rats  were  thus  derived 
from  the  soil  of  Egypt,  and  Virgil  that  bees  were  bred  by 
putrified  meat  (blue  bottles  would  have  been  nearer  the 
truth) ; in  corroboration  of  this  idea,  boys  believe  that  eels 
may  be  formed  by  tying  a knot  at  the  end  of  a horse  hair 
and  throwing  it  into  the  water. 

On  one  point  the  advocates  of  heterogeny  seem  to  be 
fully  agreed,  that  is,  whatever  may  be  the  living  creatures 
thus  produced  they  are  very  inferior  in  size  and  organiza- 
tion to  those  whose  putrified  remains  gave  them  existence, 
being  in  fact  mere  microscopical  animalcules ; whether  this 
be  true  or  not,  the  Maori  have  carried  their  researches 
further,  for  none  of  our  philosophers  have  attempted  to 
go  beyond  organic  remains,  unless  the  gases  evolved  from 
them,  or  electric  currents  may  be  so  considered,  they  have 
seemingly  devoted  much  thought  to  the  changes  which 
spirits  undergo ; in  one  respect,  however,  they  bear  a 
striking  resemblance  to  heterogeny,  in  the  belief  that  such 
change  is  of  a retrograde  nature. 


RITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


233 


Mr.  Cross  is  said  to  have  produced  a small  midge  from 
some  of  his  chemical  solutions,  and  now  even  that  seems  far 
to  exceed  more  recent  productions,  but  from  the  spirit  when 
severed  from  the  body  the  Maori  discovered  several  larger 
species  of  insects,  coleopterous,  lepidopterous,  and  others. 
Whilst  with  ourselves  they  have  found  that  putrified  remains 
produce  a small  worm,  and  that  the  human  spirit  undergoes 
a regular  gradation  of  metempsychosis  after  death,  gradually 
descending  lower  and  lower,  from  the  butterfly  to  the  beetle, 
thence  to  the  spider,  lower  still  to  his  prey  the  fly,  and  ter- 
minating with  the  midge,  the  highest  organization  we  are 
said  to  have  discovered. 

The  following  account  was  given  me  of  an  old  woman  who 
lived  near  Rotorura  some  years  ago  : — She  was  taken  ill  and 
died,  as  was  thought;  they  laid  her  out  in  the  native  fashion, 
on  a bier  in  her  house,  and  then  rubbing  the  door  over  with 
red  ochre,  in  token  of  its  being  tapu,  her  relatives  left  her ; 
some  days  after,  two  natives  were  paddling  along  the  coast 
in  their  canoe,  when  an  old  woman  called  to  them  to  take 
her  with  them ; they  landed,  and  were  rather  frightened  at 
her  appearance,  her  eyes  being  sunk  in  her  head  and  glassy  : 
she  gave  the  following  account  of  herself : she  said,  she  had 
returned  from  the  Reinga,  that  after  her  death,  she  reached 
a river,  where  some  one  met  her,  and  bid  her  run  and  call  for 
a canoe,  otherwise  she  would  be  hindered  by  a large  bird ; 
she  accordingly  ran  with  all  her  might,  and  called  for  one, 
which  immediately  came  for  her,  with  one  of  her  deceased 
relatives  in  it,  she  had  only  just  time  to  get  in,  before 
the  bird  tried  to  stop  her ; they  were  soon  at  the  other 
side,  arrived  at  a village,  where  they  were  sitting  down  to 
their  food  ; she  recognized  several  of  her  acquaintance,  who 
offered  her  a fresh-made  basket  with  some  in  it,  but  her 
relative  warned  her  not  to  eat  any,  otherwise  she  could 
never  return;  so  when  they  pressed  her  she  refused,  and 
looking  at  it  perceived  it  was  only  filth ; after  some  time, 
her  relative  bid  her  get  up  and  return,  she  obeyed,  he 
told  her  she  might  go  back  to  the  earth,  as  he  wanted 
her  to  take  care  of  his  grandchild,  for  it  was  too  young 


234 


KITES  AND  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  DEAD. 


to  be  left,  and  she  was  the  only  relative  remaining  to 
bring  him  up,  when  she  stepped  into  the  canoe,  another 
tried  to  stop  her,  and  wanted  to  go  likewise,  this  was 
her  evil  spirit,  after  some  time,  it  was  permitted  ; her 
relative  gave  her  two  very  fine  seed  kumara,  when  she 
reached  the  shore,  the  evil  spirit  likewise  wanted  to  get  out, 
and  hinder  her  from  doing  so,  but  it  was  not  allowed  to 
leave  the  canoe ; the  banks  of  the  coast  were  very  steep ; 
there  she  saw  the  roots  of  the  pohutukawa,  of  which  she  laid 
hold  to  ascend  by,  but  immediately  she  put  her  hands  upon 
them,  a number  of  potiki,  infant  gods,  ran  up,  and  were 
going  to  drag  her  down,  when  she  bethought  herself  of  the 
seed  kumara,  and  threw  one  amongst  them,  whilst  they  were 
scrambling  for  it,  she  climbed  up,  but  before  reaching  the 
top  they  returned,  she  then  threw  the  second  kumara 
amongst  them,  and  thus  diverting  their  attention  escaped 
and  safely  arrived  at  her  house,  where  her  spirit  again  en- 
tered the  body,  she  got  up  and  tried  to  open  the  door,  but 
could  not,  being  fastened  outside  ; she  then  managed,  though 
faint  with  hunger,  to  creep  out  at  the  window,  and  seeing  a 
bowl  with  the  remainder  of  the  ochre  in  it,  which  had  been 
used  to  paint  her  door,  she  drank  it  all  off.* 

There  are  many  stories  told  of  persons  who  have  descended 
into  the  Reinga  and  returned ; one  is  said  to  have  gone  there, 
who  stated,  that  when  he  jumped  into  the  sea,  he  found  it 
was  of  no  great  depth;  there  was  a large  place  below,  into 
which  the  sun  shone,  he  saw  a door,  which  he  tried  to  open 
in  vain,  it  was  fastened ; so  after  having  knocked  some 
time  to  no  purpose,  he  wisely  determined  to  revisit  the 
earth  : another  went  down,  and  there  married  a lady,  with 
whom  he  returned  to  his  own  place;  after  some  time  she 
persuaded  him  to  go  back  with  her  to  the  Reinga,  so  they 
went  to  the  jumping  place ; when  they  got  there,  she  told 
him  to  go  first,  but  giving  the  lady  the  precedence,  he  bid 
her  take  the  first  leap,  after  some  dispute,  she  did  so  ; her 
timid  partner  changing  his  mind,  returned  home,  and  left 
his  wife  in  the  Reinga  ! 


* This  poor  woman  appears  to  have  been  in  a trance. 


THE  PA  OF  TE  ARERO  ON  THE  MANGA-NUI-A-TE-AO. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS.  * 

The  natives  have  innumerable  traditions,  which  are  gene- 
rally known,  and  no  one  who  has  any  claim  to  be  thought 
an  orator  would  think  his  speech  complete,  if  he  could  not 
find  some  appropriate  sentiment  from  one  of  these  to  en- 
rich it. 

The  following  is  a well  known  one,  and  though  containing 
a great  deal  of  the  marvellous,  it  is  still  viewed  as  an  histo- 
rical account  of  some  of  their  most  distinguished  ancestors, 
and  commencement  of  their  wars. 

Tini-rau  was  a great  chief,  some  say  of  the  middle  island. 


236 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


but  others  of  Hawaiki ; he  was  celebrated  for  his  fine  form 
and  great  vanity,  and  had  several  pools  filled  with  beautiful 
transparent  water,  which  were  his  looking  glasses  to  ad- 
mire himself  in,  he  also  kept  a stud — not  of  horses,  for 
they  were  then  unknown,  but — of  whales : these  were  his 
mokai,  or  pets,  one  of  which  was  called  Tutunui.  The  fame 
of  this  chief  reached  the  ears  of  Hine-te-iwaiwa,  a lady  of 
a distant  tribe,  who  was  also  remarkable  for  her  great 
beauty,  she  fell  in  love  with  him,  from  the  report  of  his 
noble  form  and  qualities,  and  at  last  nothing  would  satisfy 
but  she  must  go  and  see  him.  One  day  when  she  was  out 
with  the  women  of  the  pa,  gathering  mussels,  assuming 
the  form  of  a mermaid,  she  suddenly  jumped  into  the  sea, 
and  dived  down,  coming  up  near  a rock  a little  distance 
from  the  shore,  on  which  she  rested  for  some  time  ; then 
diving  again,  she  had  a long  submarine  journey,  meeting 
with  many  adventures,  and  holding  conversations  with  the 
different  fish  she  saw,  especially  the  shark  and  the  kahawai, 
at  last  she  rose  up  near  the  abode  of  Tini-rau,  resumed  her 
usual  shape,  and  sat  down  considering  which  would  be  the 
best  way  of  introducing  herself  to  the  chief ; being  aware  of 
his  admiration  of  himself,  the  plan  she  adopted  to  attract 
attention,  was  to  spoil  the  looking  glasses  by  jumping 
into  them  and  rendering  the  water  muddy.  Now  Tini- 
rau  was  so  particular  about  them,  that  he  kept  an  owl 
as  their  guardian,  who,  perched  upon  a lofty  tree  in  the 
vicinity,  always  kept  his  eye  upon  his  charge  ; immedi- 
ately therefore  he  saw  Hine-te-iwaiwa  floundering  about 
in  them,  he  called  to  the  chief,  who  was  sitting  on  his 
elevated  stage,  incensed  at  the  insult,  he  came  down  at  once 
and  went  to  the  pools,  where  he  soon  discovered  the  cause, 
his  anger  immediately  vanished,  and  was  turned  into  love 
for  the  beautiful  lady  who  had  taken  such  liberty  with  his 
pools,  and  equally  soon  formed  an  attachment  with  her. 

Tini-rau's  wives,  however,  did  not  admire  their  new  com- 
panion, so  much  as  their  lord  and  master,  he  was  therefore 
obliged  to  keep  her  apart  from  them.  After  some  time, 
Hine-te-iwaiwa  gave  birth  to  a child  ; this  event  caused  her 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


237 


to  be  viewed  with  still  greater  hatred  by  the  jealous  ladies ; 
two  of  them  determined  to  kill  heir,  she  was  naturally  in 
great  fear,  but  as  they  separately  approached  her,  she  had 
time  to  utter  a potent  spell,*  and  throw  a stone  at  the  first, 
whose  body  burst  open,  and  behold  it  was  filled  with  green 
stone ; she  treated  the  second  lady  in  the  same  way,  and 
with  a similar  result.  Thus  green  stone  was  formed. 

After  some  time,  Hine-te-iwaiwa  returned  to  visit  her 
friends,  and  Tini-rau  missing  her  society,  went  to  her  vil- 
lage; when  he  approached  the  place,  where  she  lived,  he 
saw  some  children  playing  at  the  back  of  the  pa,  in  a swamp, 
which  was  covered  with  the  kakaho  or  reeds  : he  hid  himself 
amongst  them,  and  then  made  a noise  to  attract  the  atten- 
tion of  the  children,  who  came  to  see  what  it  was,  when  he 
recognized  his  own  child  by  its  ear  ornaments ; he  sent  it 
to  its  mother,  with  a little  scented  bag,  she  had  given  him, 
which  he  constantly  wore  round  his  neck,  the  child  went, 
and  its  mother  immediately  recognized  the  love  token, 
and  came  to  him,  bringing  him  into  the  pa,  where  he  was 
received  and  welcomed  with  great  distinction,  and  so  many 
feasts  given  to  do  him  honor,  that  their  entire  stock  of 
provisions  was  soon  consumed,  and  to  increase  the  evil 
they  were  unsuccessful  in  fishing.  Tini-rau  saw  their  des- 
titute state,  and  promised  them  a plentiful  supply  of  fish 
provided  they  all  remained  in  their  houses  with  their  doors 
and  windows  closed  during  the  night,  and  did  not  open 
them  before  the  morning,  to  this  they  readily  agreed ; he 
then  uttered  one  of  his  powerful  spells,  immediately  a great 
rushing  sound  was  heard,  which  continued  during  the  whole 
night,  and  in  the  morning  when  they  opened  their  doors, 


* Harnru  te  toki, 

Ngahoa  te  toki, 

Hei  pao  i to  uru  te  toki, 
Hei  pao  te  roro  te  toki, 
Tena  toki  ka  haruru, 

Tena  toki  ka  ngatoro, 

Ko  toki  e Whiro-te-tupua, 
Manawa  ko  koe, 
Kaitangata. 


Loud  sounds  the  stone, 

Sharp  pain  is  the  stone, 

To  strike  the  seat  of  life  is  the  stone, 
To  strike  the  brain  is  the  stone, 
Behold  the  stone  resounds, 

Behold  the  stone  will  destroy, 

The  stone  of  Whiro-te-tupua, 

Spirit  even  of  thee 
The  man  destroyer. 


238 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


they  were  amazed  to  find  all  the  inside  of  the  pa  filled  with 
every  kind  of  fish,  which  reached  up  to  their  very  watas.* 
After  staying  some  time  with  the  relations  of  Hine-te- 
iwaiwa,  they  returned  to  Tini-ram’s  abode,  where  she  again 
became  a mother;  but  before  the  child  was  born,  her  hus- 
band began  to  slight  her,  and  went  to  live  with  one  of  his 
other  wives ; when  Hine-te-iwaiwa  thought  she  was  near  her 
confinement,  she  sent  two  of  her  slaves  to  bring  Tini-rau, 
that  he  might  catch  some  fish,  for  which  she  had  taken  a 
fancy ; when  her  slaves  reached  the  outside  of  the  pa,  they 
called  out  Tini-rau-e,  he  answered,  -e-  Your  wife  is  unwell, 
and  very  near  her  confinement,  she  wishes  you  to  catch 
her  some  fish  ; Tini-rau  went  on  board  his  canoe,  and 
reached  her  abode,  he  demanded,  what  is  the  matter 
with  you  ? Hine-te-iwaiwa  replied,  my  child,  about  to 
be  born,  when  he  had  seen  her  he  made  a fence  of  net- 
tle f branches  and  briars  bound  with  flax,  around  her 
house,  and  then  left  her,  that  she  might  not  be  able  to 
leave  her  abode ; her  heart  was  very  dark  at  such  treat- 
ment, and  shortly  afterwards  the  child  was  born ; when  Tini- 
rau  heard  of  this,  he  went  and  began  to  open  the  fence  of 
nettles  and  brambles ; but  being  deeply  grieved  for  his  want 
of  love,  Hine-te-iwaiwa,  cried  to  her  brother,  0 Rupe,  J come 
and  take  me  and  my  child  away.  Rupe  flew  down  at  once, 
and  uttered  these  words  : — 


Ko  Hina. 

Ko  hina  te  tuahine, 
Ko  Rupe  te  tungane, 
Mei  na  whea  mai  ? 
Mei  na  raro  mai, 

Mei  na  runga  mai, 
Whakapiki  to  ara, 
Tatau  to  aroha, 
Tatau  ki  motu  tapu. 


Hina  is  my  sister, 

Rupe  is  her  brother, 

But  how  came  he  here  ? 
Hid  he  come  from  below  ? 
Hid  he  come  from  above  ? 
Climb  up  your  way, 

Let  your  love  turn, 

Turn  to  the  sacred  isle. 


* They  are  food  stores,  erected  on  poles  about  five  feet  from  the  ground,  to 
secure  them  from  dogs  and  rats. 

f The  ongaonga  nettle  of  New  Zealand  is  a large  sized  shrub. 

J Rupe  was  a god  in  the  form  of  a pigeon  and  the  creator  of  it.  He  was 
brother  to  Hine-te-iwaiwa  ; he  came  from  Hawaiki  to  look  for  her. 


TEADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


239 


To  which  Hine-te-iwaiwa  replied- 


Ko  Rnpe  te  tungane, 

Ko  Hina  te  tuahine, 

Mei  na  whea  mai  ? 

Mei  na  raro  mai  ? 

Mei  na  rnnga  mai  ? 
Whakapiko  to  ara  kia  Rehua. 


Rupe  is  my  brother, 

Hina  is  his  sister, 

But  how  came  he  here  ? 

Did  he  come  from  below  ? 

Did  he  come  from  above  ? 

Let  him  ascend  up  his  way  to 
Rehua. 


When  Tini-rau  returned,  Rnpe  with  the  child  and  its 
mother  were  gone,  he  had  folded  them  up  under  his  wings 
and  flown  away ; Tini-rau  called  out  as  they  went,  0 Rupe, 
bring  back  your  sister  and  the  child  ! Hine-te-iwaiwa 
said  to  her  brother,  do  not  consent  to  my  going  back, 
only  let  him  have  his  child ; he  gently  let  it  fall,  and  Tini- 
rau  caught  it,  he  fed  it  with  water,  the  child  grew,  and 
was  named  Tuhuruhuru,  from  the  plumage  of  Rupe.  One 
day  the  children  went  to  play  at  the  teka,*  some  cast  their 
stalks — they  did  not  fly,  Tuhuruhuru  threw  his,  having  first 
uttered  this  karakia  : — 

Taku  teka  nei,  You  are  my  teka, 

Ko  te  teka  nawai,  The  teka  of  whom  ? 

Ko  te  taka  na  Tuhuruhuru,  The  teka  of  Tuhuruhuru. 

Te  rokohina  te  rokohana.  Overtake  the  other  sticks  and 

arrive  first. 

Jealous  of  his  skill  in  throwing  the  teka,  the  children 
mocked  him,  there  goes  the  teka  of  this  bastard,  where  is 
his  mother  ? 

Tuhuruhuru  heard  their  taunts,  and  when  he  returned 
home  he  demanded  of  Tini-rau  his  father,  where  is  my 
mother  ? Tini-rau  replied,  I don’t  know,  you  can’t  reach 
her,  the  child  demanded,  but  where  is  she  ? you  do  not  tell 
me,  lest  I should  go  to  her,  his  father  said,  you  are  wel- 
come to  go,  if  you  like,  but  listen  to  my  advice,  when  you 
have  reached  a burnt  piece  of  ground,  go  and  roll  yourself  in 
the  ashes  to  disguise  your  countenance,  that  they  may  think 


* A game  with  fern  stalks,  which  are  thrown  to  see  who  can  cast  them  the 
furthest,  and  hit  a mark. 


240 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


you  are  a slave,  Tini-rau  asked,  is  your  heart  strong  to  go  ? 
the  child  replied,  yes,  it  is  strong,  he  then  directed  him, 
when  you  have  reached  the  pa,  offer  to  carry  water  for 
Rupe,  and  when  you  have  brought  it,  do  not  pour  it  into 
the  mouth,  but  into  his  nose ; in  the  evening,  when  Hine- 
te-iwaiwa  stands  up  to  dance  with  the  damsels  of  the  place, 
then  do  you  utter  a karakia.  The  child  said.  But  what 
karakia  shall  I say  ? Tini-rau  replied  : — 

Te  tu  o Hine-te-iwaiwa  The  garment  of  Hine-te-iwaiwa 

Makere  makere  Has  fallen  fallen, 

Te  Taupaki  o Hine-te-iwaiwa  The  covering  of  Hine-te-iwaiwa 
Makere  makere.  Has  fallen  fallen. 

Tuhuruhuru  having  received  his  directions,  set  off ; when 
he  arrived  opposite  the  place,  he  saw  the  women  who  came 
to  carry  firewood,  he  therefore  rolled  himself  in  the  ashes 
that  they  might  take  him  for  a slave  child;*  having  reached 
the  dead  wood,  he  laid  down  amongst  it ; when  the  wo- 
men came  to  collect  fuel,  saw  him  there  stretched  out  all 
his  length,  they  cried  out,  here  is  a nice  young  slave  for 
us,  he  will  do  for  Hine-te-iwaiwa;  on  reaching  the  pa, 
they  turned  him  over  to  her,  she  said,  oh,  he  will  just 
do  to  carry  water  for  Rupe  : before  long  he  was  sent  for 
some ; Tuhuruhuru  returned  with  it,  Rupe  held  out  his 
hands,  but  Tuhuruhuru  poured  it  up  his  nose,  Rupe  cursed : 
the  young  slave  has  poured  the  water  up  my  nose ; he  ran 
after  him,  and  gave  him  a beating,  Tuhuruhuru  cried,  com- 
plaining, 

In  vain  have  I come  ! 

Rape  is  my  uncle, 

Hine-te-iwaiwa  is  my  mother, 

And  Tini-rau  is  my  father. 

Rupe  said,  the  little  slave  grumbles  and  cries. 

In  the  evening,  Hine-te-iwaiwa  and  her  damsels  began 
the  dance,  then  Tuhuruhuru  uttered  his  karakia  : — 

The  garment  of  Hine-te-iwaiwa  has  fallen,  fallen, 

The  garment  of  Hine-te-iwaiwa  has  fallen,  fallen. 

* This  is  a proof  of  their  slaves  having  formerly  been  of  a different  race  and 
darker  color. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


241 


Hine-te-iwaiwa  turned  aside  and  stooped  down,  because  she 
had  dropped  her  garment.  Some  of  the  young  women 
heard  it,  and  said  to  Hine-te-iwaiwa,  the  young  slave  has 
been  making  game  of  your  garment.  Hine-te-iwaiwa  ran 
after  him,  and  gave  him  a beating,  Tuhuruhuru  cried,  la- 
menting^— 

In  vain  have  I come  : 

Rupe  is  my  uncle, 

Hine-te-iwaiwa  is  my  mother, 

And  Tini-rau  is  my  father. 

He  ran  crying  out  of  the  house ; she  heard  her  child  crying, 
and  tried  to  catch  him,  being  grieved  for  what  she  had  done, 
saying,  Alas  ! my  child,  my  youngest,  that  I should  beat 
you.  Tuhuruhuru  thought  they  now  knew  him,  he  fled, 
they  pursued,  but  could  not  overtake  him ; he  ran  into  the 
water  to  cleanse  himself  from  the  ashes.  Hine-te-iwaiwa 
called,  0 Rupe,  fly  down  at  once,  and  catch  your  child, 
he  flew  down  to  the  water,  and  caught  him  up,  and 
brought  him  back  to  the  pa.  Hine-te-iwaiwa  cried  over 
her  child,  whom  she  had  now  recognized,  alas  ! alas  ! my 
child,  who  was  abandoned  ! After  she  had  finished  her 
tangi,  she  asked  him,  what  message  did  his  father  send 
to  her,  Tuhuruhuru  replied,  he  said  we  and  Rupe  must 
return  to  my  naming;*  Rupe  and  his  sister  agreed,  they 
reached  the  abode  of  Tini-rau ; he  was  rejoiced  to  see 
his  wife,  brother-in-law,  and  child,  they  slept,  and  the 
following  morning,  as  soon  as  it  dawned,  he  sent  off  a 
messenger  to  assemble  all  the  chiefs  to  the  naming  of  his 
child.  All  agreed  to  come,  and  Kae  as  well ; they  called 
him  Tuhuruhuru,  his  first  name  was  Tu-ai-takaroro,  the 
meaning  of  this  new  name  is  The  Plumage  of  Rupe  ; when 
, the  ceremony  was  over,  all  returned  to  their  homes,  but  Kae 
remained ; after  most  of  the  company  had  dispersed,  he 
inquired,  where  is  Tutunui,  the  pet  whale  of  Tini-rau,  the 

* The  Tuatanga,  ceremony  of  bestowing  a name  upon  him,  was  considered  a 
very  important  rite. 


R 


242 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


mokai  of  my  grandchild  ? will  it  not  serve  as  a bridge  to 
carry  me  over  ? Tini-ran  replied,  by  no  means,  lest  your 
grandchild's  pet  should  die.  Kae  replied,  no,  I will  be  very 
careful  of  him ; Tini-rau  at  last  consented,  but  gave  him 
directions  how  to  use  it ; Kae  agreed  to  all  his  instructions, 
Tini-rau  said,  when  he  approaches  the  pa,  and  shakes, 
you  must  get  off,  and  go  on  shore,  lest  you  chafe  his  belly 
against  the  rocks  at  the  bottom,  and  he  should  die,  Kae 
assented,  saying,  Yes,  I am  aware  of  it,  and  will  do  as  you 
say;  he  then  got  on  the  whale's  back,  but  paid  no  atten- 
tion to  the  directions  given,  for  when  he  was  out  at  sea 
he  did  just  as  he  liked ; when  he  approached  the  shore, 
which  is  close  to  the  pa,  Tutunui  began  to  shake;  Kae 
paid  no  attention,  but  still  kept  on  his  back,  he  chafed 
his  belly  against  the  bottom  : Tutunui,  the  pet  whale  of 
Tini-rau,  was  killed,  the  people  of  that  pa  cut  him  up,  and 
cooked  him ; Tini-rau  kept  waiting  for  his  return  : night 
passed  away,  the  morning  also,  and  yet  he  did  not  come 
back ; at  noon,  the  tonga  or  north-east  wind  arose,  and 
brought  the  savoury  smell  of  the  ovens  to  his  nose.  Tini-rau 
cried  in  his  sorrow,  the  fragrance  of  Tutunui  is  wafted  across 
from  Haruru-atea  to  me,  a place  of  Hawaiki.  From  that 
time,  from  the  death  of  Tutunui,  the  heart  of  Tini-rau  became 
dark ; he  exclaimed,  I must  have  Kae  for  my  revenge, 
after  many  nights'  thought,  he  ordered  his  wife  and  the  wo- 
men of  his  place  to  go  and  fetch  Kae,  the  women  answered, 
we  don’t  know  him,  Tini-rau  replied,  you  will  find  him 
out  by  his  teeth,  but,  they  said,  how  shall  we  be  able  to 
see  them  ? play  some  silly  game  was  the  reply ; enough,  the 
women  agreed,  they  got  into  their  canoe,  and  paddled 
away,  when  they  reached  the  pa,  they  entered  the  house 
where  Kae  lived ; they  found  that  tutau , or  singing  in 
turns,  he  whae}  cats'  cradles,  he  haha,  singing  with  ges- 
tures, and  he  waiata,  songs,  were  the  amusements  of  the 
evening,  but  Kae  did  not  laugh  when  he  heard  them ; they 
inquired,  what  is  the  haka  that  will  make  him  laugh  ? they 
at  last  found  the  pua  joua , the  waitoremi,  the  anaana.  They 
sung  the  vyaitoremi  : — 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


243 


Ako  an  ki  te  kowhiti,  kaore 
te  kowiti, 

Ako  an  ki  te  whewhera,  kaore 
te  whewhera, 

E kowhiti  Nuku,  E kowhiti 
Rangi, 

E kowhiti  were  were,  Pna- 
pua  e — hanahana  e — 
tinakn  ai. 


I teach  how  to  whistle  and  he 
does  not  whistle  ; I teach  how 
to  open  ont  the  fingers  and 
he  does  not  open  ont  his ; 
Nuku  whistles,  Rangi  whistles, 
whistle  a ronnd,  0 Puapua,  0 
thon  red-garment-wearing  fel- 
low, obey  my  spell. 


he  laughed,  they  saw  the  hollow  space,  Kae  had  lost  his 
front  tooth ; this  was  sufficient,  they  gave  over,  they  re- 
peated this  rotu,*  or  charm,  to  send  him  to  sleep  : — 

0 mata  e tiromai,  0 eyes  that  behold, 

Nana  tn  wakarehua,  Be  yon  closed  in  sleep, 

Tn  wakamoea,  e moe,  Be  you  fast  bound  in  sleep,  sleep. 

He  tried  to  resist  its  power,  and  placed  two  pieces  of  pearl- 
shell  over  his  eyes,  to  make  them  think  he  was  awake,  but 
in  vain,  Kae  could  not  withstand  the  charm,  he  fell  fast 
asleep,  he  was  completely  overpowered,  with  every  one  in 
the  house  as  well ; they  then  went  and  gently  carried  him 
on  board  their  canoe,  and  paddled  off  with  him  to  their 
home ; there  they  laid  him  by  the  pillar  of  the  house,  and 
left  him  to  sleep. 

In  the  morning  they  heated  the  oven  ; sow-thistles  and 
other  leaves  were  used  as  a wariki  or  covering  for  it,  and 
food  was  placed  in  a basket  by  the  side,  they  then  awoke 
Kae,  sir,  sir,  arise,  although  you  sleep  alone  there,  yes, 
he  replied,  this  is  my  sleeping  place ; come  then  to  eat,  he 
went ; Tini-rau  motioned  him  to  his  place  on  the  green 
covering  of  the  oven ; he  sat  down  upon  it,  and  stretched 
out  his  hand  to  take  the  food,  they  then  poured  water  over 
his  back,  the  thick  steam  from  the  heated  oven  beneath 
immediately  arose,  and  stifled  him — Kae  was  dead;  they 


* The  rotu  is  a potent  spell  to  throw  a person  into  a deep  sleep  ; the  same 
word  is  used  in  Tahaiti  for  prayer  ; it  too  often  has  a similar  effect  elsewhere. 


R 2 


244 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


then  covered  him  over  with  the  leaves  : he  was  cooked  and 
eaten.*  This  led  to  interminable  wars. 


The  Burning  of  the  Tihi  o Manono  by  Wakataupotiki. 

The  beginning  of  the  journey  of  Apakura  to  fetch 
Wakatau  to  avenge  the  death  of  her  child,,  of  Tuwaka- 
raro.  She  found  Wakatau  at  his  place  Paparahi,  and  on 
her  arrival  called  out  to  him,  I have  come  to  fetch  you 
to  revenge  the  death  of  your  youngest  brother,  because 
you  are  both  my  children.  Wakatau  assented,  and  said 
to  Apakura,  return,  and  when  you  get  home  make  me  a 
canoe,  a long  spade,  a spear  also,  and  fill  me  several  cala- 
bashes with  oil,  when  Apakura  got  home,  the  men  of 
the  place  enquired  of  her,  what  did  he  say  to  you  ? She 
replied,  he  bid  me  make  him  a canoe,  adze  him  a long 
spade,  and  fill  him  a calabash  with  oil  (literally  with  water 
which  is  put  for  oil),  it  was  not  long  before  the  men 
of  the  place  had  finished  the  canoe,  formed  the  spade, 
and  filled  the  calabashes,  when  Wakatau  arrived,  the 
thousands  of  the  place  were  there  awaiting  him  to  be  his 
companions  in  the  war  expedition,  he  asked  for  what 

* In  another  version  of  this  story  : Tini-rau  despatched  his  sisters,  when 
they  discovered  Kae,  who  had  built  himself  a new  house,  they  sent  the  exact 
pattern  of  it  to  Tini-rau,  he  caused  a fac-simile  of  it  to  be  made  ; they 
then  rotued  the  entire  pa,  carried  off  Kae,  and  laid  him  in  the  new  house. 
In  the  morning,  one  went  and  awoke  him,  saying,  well,  Kae,  where 
are  you  ? he  replied,  where  should  I be,  but  in  my  house  ; another  crept  in 
and  said,  well,  Kae,  where  are  you  ? he  looked  about,  but  could  find  no 
difference,  as  both  houses  were  exactly  alike,  he  said,  I am  at  home  ; a third 
came  ; and  thrusting  the  door  a little  aside,  demanded,  well,  Kae,  where  are 
you  ? Kae  looked  out,  but  seeing  different  scenery,  said,  I don’t  know. 
They  then  told  him  where  he  was,  and  killed  him. 

Ko  te  mea  i kai  kino  ai  te  Tangata  Maori. 

Na  Kae  i timata,  ko  tutunui  he  tohora,  Titiro  ana  nga  tamahine  a Tini-rau, 
ko  Kae,  ka  patua  na  Tini-rau  : i patu  Kae  rawa,  muri  iho  ko  Tuhuruhuru,  ka 
patua  hei  utu  mo  Kae  : ka  ea  te  mate  o Kae,  ka  utua  e Wakatau  : ka  mate  ko 
Mango  pare,  ko  Manga  waho.  Na  titiro  ana  a Wakatau,  ka  tahuna  te  ware  o 
te  Tihi  o Manono.  Ka  tahi  ka  tupu  mai  ki  nga  uri  : ka  tahi  ka  kainga  te  tan- 
gata no  te  witinga  mai  o Tainui  o te  Arawa,  o te  mata  atua  ki  tenei  Motu  ka 
timata  ai  te  kai  tangata.  Na  Hoturoa  tenei  Korero. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


245 


purpose  so  many  hundreds  were  assembled  ? the  men  of  the 
place  answered,  these  hundreds  are  to  be  your  companions 
in  the  fight,  Wakatau  said,  no,  let  the  many  remain,  and 
a few  only  be  my  companions  to  bring  back  the  canoe, 
then  Wakatau  went  on  board  his  canoe,  the  Hikutoto  was 
its  name ; they  paddled  in  the  night  and  arrived  outside  the 
pa,  where  they  anchored,  in  the  morning  some  of  the  men 
came  out  of  the  pa,  they  saw  the  Tcumete*  bowl,  afloat,  the 
cry  was  raised  throughout  the  pa,  here  is  the  kumete  afloat, 
Mongourunui  called  out,  I will  go  and  bring  it  back,  he 
swam  to  the  canoe,  when  he  approached  the  side,  he  was 
speared  with  the  ko,  he  was  killed,  they  pulled  him  on  board, 
the  men  of  the  pa  saw  that  Urunui  was  dead,  they  uttered  the 
proverb,  ffIt  is  the  fault  of  the  swimming,  let  me  fetch  my 
swimming  stroke  to  the  prow  direct.”  Mangoururoa  entered 
the  water  and  dived  to  the  canoe  which  floated  outside,  he 
went  under  the  prow,  Wakatau  saw  him,  he  poured  out  some 
oil  from  the  calabash,  the  water  became  transparent,  he  saw 
him  diving,  he  speared  him  with  the  ko,  and  pulled  him  into 
the  canoe.  Mangourutapena  saw  it,  he  uttered  the  proverb, 
“ The  fault  of  the  diving,  let  me  take  my  dive  to  the  stern.” 
That  man  entered  the  water,  he  dived  down,  Wakatau  saw 
him,  he  poured  out  more  oil  from  his  calabash,  he  saw  him 
clearly,  he  speared  him  with  the  ko,  but  only  wounded  his 
tongue,  he  was  not  killed,  that  man  was  left  alive  and  suffered 
to  swim  back,  this  was  all,  Wakatau  returned,  when  he 
reached  the  road,  he  called  to  his  friends,  I must  go  inland, 
do  you  take  back  the  canoe  to  the  kainga ; in  the  dawning 
of  the  morning,  if  a great  redness  arises  in  the  sky  Tihi-o- 
manono  will  be  burnt,  and  the  thousands  of  Poporokewa 
killed ; if  there  be  but  a faint  redness  in  the  sky,  it  will  be 
a sign  that  I am  killed  by  Poporokewa.  When  he  had 
finished  his  friends  returned  with  the  canoe,  he  also  went 
and  arrived  at  the  place ; they  were  busy  carrying  firewood ; 
he  did  the  same  and  thrust  his  tiaha , weapon,  within  a 

* It  appears  they  did  not  know  what  a canoe  was  then,  they  thought  it  was 
a bowl. 


246 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


bundle  of  the  fuel,  for  it  was  evening,  and  dark.  The  men 
of  the  pa  assembled  within  the  house,  to  question  the  per- 
son who  had  been  speared  by  Wakatau  as  to  his  appearance ; 
one  stood  up  and  asked  if  Wakatau  were  like  him,  did  the 
fellow  resemble  me  ? the  wounded  man  indistinctly  said, 
Short  person,  large  face,  great  eyes ; he  sat  down,  another 
arose  and  asked,  was  he  like  me  ? the  other  replied,  no  ; 
he  sat  down,  then  another  stood  up,  and  put  the  same  ques- 
tion as  before,  thus  they  went  on  until  every  one  in  the 
house  had  made  the  inquiry,  at  last  Wakatau  arose  to 
question  the  man,  Was  he  like  me  ? Mangourutapena,  the 
man  who  was  wounded  in  the  tongue,  looked  steadfastly  at 
Wakatau,  and  examined  his  person  attentively,  then  he  ex- 
claimed, 1 am  almost  convinced  you  are  Wakatau  himself, 
yes,  you  are;  immediately  Wakatau  seized  his  weapon,  and 
brandished  it  from  one  side  of  the  house  to  the  other ; he 
hastened  to  fly  by  the  pihanga,  opening  in  the  roof  above, 
he  escaped  outside,  he  flew  to  the  window  and  closed  the 
door  of  the  house  the  day  dawned  and  the  sky  was  red,  he 
had  set  fire  to  the  house,  the  sky  was  very  red,  the  men  of 
his  place  knew  that  the  Tihi-o-manono  had  fallen  by  Wa- 
katau, because  the  sky  was  very  red  ; the  house  was  burnt, 
and  the  thousands  of  Poporokewa  perished  in  its  flames. 
Wakatau  potiki  asked  the  slave  whose  life  he  had  spared, 
where  is  the  road  by  which  Porokewa  descends  to  his  cave, 
for  he  did  not  live  with  his  tribe  in  the  Tihi-o-manono,  the 
slave  said,  by  the  roof ; Wakatau  again  asked,  how  when  he 
comes  forth  ? snare  him  : again  Wakatau  potiki  inquired, 
what  is  the  call  ? the  slave  answered  thus  : Poporokewa — 
oh  ! arise,  he  will  growl,  then  cry,  this  is  the  spring,  they 
earth  up  the  kumara.  Wakatau  potiki  departed,  he  went  to 
his  abode  aud  pushed,  aside  the  covering  of  grass,  and 
discovered  the  path,  by  which  he  descended.  Wakatau 
laid  his  snare  round  the  opening  at  the  mouth  of  the  pit, 
to  snare  Poporokewa,  when  he  had  finished  the  placing 
it,  he  called  Poporokewa — ho  ! a growl  ascended,  0 come 
forth,  come  forth,  this  is  the  spring,  they  till  the  kumara, 
come  to  karakia ; — a yes  ascended  from  Poporokewa,  he  ap- 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


247 


peared  above,  Ms  bead  and  shoulders,  entered  within  the 
snare,  then  he  pulled  it  tight,  he  was  killed;  Poporokewa 
died,  the  thousands  of  Poporokewa  also  were  killed  by  Wa- 
katau  potiki,  thence  the  proverb  from  Muri  W akatau  potiki, 
by  whom  was  burnt  the  Tihi-o-manono.  When  he  had 
finished  his  slaying,  Wakatau  returned  to  his  place  to  Pa- 
parohia. 

NGA  TORO  RANGI  AND  HIS  SlSTERS. 

Nga  toro  i rangi  went  from  Maketu,  where  he  lived  with 
his  slave  Nga  uruhoe  after  his  arrival  from  Hawaiki,  to  see 
what  kind  of  country  there  was  inland ; he  reached  mount 
Tauwhara,  which  he  ascended,  and  thence  walked  by  the 
sea  of  Taupo,  into  which  he  cast  his  staff,  which  became  a 
great  totara  tree,  and  is  still  to  be  seen,  standing  up  in  the 
dark  blue  waters  of  the  lake ; * as  he  walked  along  its  shores 
he  shook  his  mat  over  the  waters,  and  from  the  bits  which 
fell  from  it  sprang  the  Inanga,  f which  now  abound  in  the 
lake. 

Tia  was  the  first  person  who  came  to  Taupo,  he  called 
the  moana  f Taupo  a Tia,”  he  came  to  Totara ; after 
him  Nga  toro  i rangi  arrived,  who  saw  the  signs  of  Tia  having 
been  there,  but  to  make  it  appear  that  he  was  the  first  by  a 
very  long  time,  he  did  not  cut  a green  post,  but  took  an  old 
dry  one,  and  set  that  up  as  a sign  of  his  coming  before  Tia, 
afterwards  he  went  on  to  Poutu,  and  there  left  the  im- 
pression of  his  foot  on  the  solid  rock,  where  the  marks  of  his 
heel  and  five  toes  are  still  plainly  to  be  seen ; thence  he 
journeyed  on  to  Tongariro,  which  he  ascended,  in  order  the 
better  to  see  the  country,  there  he  was  overcome  with  the 

* Numbers  of  large  trunks  of  trees  may  be  seen  in  the  lake,  proving  that  the 
ground  had  subsided,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  matter  ejected  from  the 
neighbouring  volcano. 

f A small  fish,  about  two  inches  long,  very  abundant,  and  taken  in  large 
quantities,  it  is  one  of  the  chief  supports  of  the  Taupo  natives. 

X Taupo  lake,  on  account  of  its  size,  was  called  “ Te  moana,”  The  Sea, 
by  way  of  distinction. 


248 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


frost  and  snow ; his  tihe,  or  mat,  was  made  of  the  monoa,* 
an  epacris,  as  the  snow  settled  upon  it,  he  gave  it  a shake, 
and  thence  sprang  up  that  shrub  which  now  covers  those 
inland  plains.  Suffering  from  the  cold  Nga  toro  i rangi 
shouted  to  his  sisters  on  Wakarif  to  bring  him  fire,  they 
heard  his  voice,  and  sent  some  of  the  sacred  fire  which 
they  had  brought  with  them  from  Hawaiki  by  their  slaves, 
the  taniwa  Pupu,  and  Te  Haeata ; J they  went  under  ground 
all  the  way,  and  came  out  on  the  top  of  Tongariro. 

The  fire  reached  Nga  toro  i rangi  only  just  in  time  to  save 
his  life,  but  his  slave  was  already  dead,  when  they  arrived 
with  the  fire  it  was  too  late,  but  in  remembrance  of  him  he 
called  the  orifice,  out  of  which  the  flame  arose,  by  his  name, 
Nga  uru  hoe,  the  crater  of  Tongariro  is  thus  called  to  this 
day,  and  the  fire  still  burns  all  the  way  under  ground  from 
Wakari  to  Tongariro. 

The  cause  of  his  sisters  coming  from  Hawaiki  was  the  curse 
of  Manaia  when  he  had  his  hair  cut ; on  that  sacred  operation 
being  performed  much  food  was  cooked  for  the  assembled 
guests,  it  was  prepared  by  his  two  wives  Kuku  and  Hohata, 
the  sisters  of  Nga  toro  i rangi,  the  food  being  under  done, 
Manaia  was  greatly  annoyed,  he  said  to  his  wives,  did  the 
stones  of  Tuaikorora,  which  you  used  to  heat  your  oven 
with  cook  your  brother,  that  the  food  of  my  jourenga,  hair 
cutting,  was  done  so  badly  ? now  this  was  a great  curse, 
the  women  therefore  wept  for  this  insult  to  their  brother 
Nga  toro  i rangi,  that  is  all,  they  uttered  their  karakia, 
repeated  their  spells  to  counteract  the  curse,  they  fled, 
those  wives  of  Manaia,  they  went  in  a canoe  called  the 
Rewarewa,  or  as  another  account  states  in  the  Huruhuru 
Manu.  In  another  tradition  it  is  said  that  the  two  sisters  of 
Nga  toro  i rangi,  Haungaroa  and  Kiwi,  were  gallantly  car- 
ried from  Hawaiki  by  two  Gods,  Rongomai  and  Iho  o te 

* The  monoa  is  said  to  be  the  parent  of  all  trees,  or  the  first  formed,  and  if 
used  as  fuel  to  cook  with,  being  a sacred  tree,  invariably  causes  rain. 

f This  is  a volcano  in  the  Bay  of  Plenty,  known  as  White  Island,  from  the 
cloud  of  smoke  which  is  always  being  emitted  from  its  crater. 

t These  names  seem  to  have  reference  to  the  boiling  springs. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


249 


Eangi  without  a canoe,  the  ladies  were  spirited  over,  they 
landed  at  Wakari,  white  or  sulphur  island ; and  had  no 
sooner  reached  it,  than  they  heard  the  cry  of  their  brother 
for  fire,  which  fortunately  wTas  brought  with  them.*  After 
sending  it  by  their  slaves  they  also  followed,  first  lighting 
their  fire  on  Wakari ; thence  they  reached  the  Nga  ti  wha 
kawhe,  when  they  arrived  at  Kainga  roa  they  lighted  their 
fire,  and  from  the  time  consumed  in  eating  after  their  long 
fast,  they  called  the  place  Kainga  roa  ; thence  they  went  to 


WAREAKE,  A BOILING  MUD  POOL  AT  KAINGAROA. 


Tauwhara,  where  they  lighted  their  fire ; then  to  Tokanu, 
and  there  likewise  left  a fire,  afterwards  they  ascended  Ton- 
gariro,  and  made  another,  in  remembrance  of  the  sufferings 
of  their  brother  from  the  snow,  but  he  had  left  and  returned 


* This  tradition  of  bringing  fire  from  Hawaiki  affords  conclusive  evidence 
of  the  truth  of  the  legend  that  they  really  came  from  that  locality,  it  proves 
that  the  remembrance  of  Maunaloa,  one  of  the  largest  volcanoes  in  the  world 
was  retained,  and  this  line  of  volcanic  agency  thus  extending  from  Wakari  to 
Tongariro,  shows  what  a correct  apprehension  of  the  truth  they  possessed. 


250 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


to  Maketu ; they  did  the  same,  going  inland  by  Waikato, 
and  also  lighted  their  fire  at  Hipapatua,  and  thence  a little 
further  off  at  Orakei  korako,  then  at  Tihi  oruru,  again  at 
Rotomahana,  then  they  made  a fire  at  Wakarewa-rewa, 
afterwards  at  Ohine  mutu,  and  there  they  terminated  their 
work  of  setting  the  earth  on  fire ; they  went  on  to  Maketu 
to  see  their  brother,  and  reaching  his  marae  got  on  the  tuahu. 
In  the  morning,  when  Nga  toro  i rangi  went  to  perform  his 
usual  devotions,  he  saw  his  sisters  sitting  there,  and  said, 
is  that  you  ? they  replied,  yes ; what  are  you  seeking  ? 
they  answered,  you ; what  did  you  come  for  ? a curse  of 
your  brother-in-law  Manaia,  that  you  would  be  cooked 
with  the  stones  of  Tuaikorora  ;*  what  was  the  reason  ? an 
oven  of  half-cooked  food  which  we  made ; then  said  Nga 
toro  i rangi,  leave  for  the  cooking  of  him  the  stones 
of  Maikukutea  at  Maketu.  This  done  they  karakiad 
upon  the  Tuahu  ;f  when  Nga  toro  i rangi  had  finished  he 
dug  up  a totara  for  his  canoe  out  of  a swamp,  the  bare 
tree  in  its  natural  state,  unhollowed  and  unshaped,  with 
its  roots  and  branches  remaining,  this  was  called  Tota- 
rakeria,  the  dug  up  totara;  then  they  embarked  upon  it 
with  their  followers,  who  were  twice  seventy  in  number, 
perched  amongst  its  branches.  It  was  the  power  of  his  ka- 
rakia  which  made  it  so  light  as  to  float  upon  the  surface  of 
the  sea ; yes,  twice  seventy  men  went  upon  the  branches  of 
Totarakeria,  they  reached  Hawaiki,  landed  and  went  on 
shore  in  the  night,  entered  the  marae,  the  sacred  inclosure 
of  Manaia,  and  laid  themselves  down  amongst  the  tuahus. 
Then  Nga  toro  i rangi  bid  his  followers  smite  their  noses 
with  their  fists,  and  smear  themselves  over  with  the  blood, 
that  they  might  appear  to  be  slain,  from  this  circumstance 
the  name  of  the  battle  was  Ihumoto  motokia,  or  bloody- 
nose  battle.  Nga  toro  i rangi  ascended  the  Tuahu  of  Manaia 
and  laid  himself  down  upon  it  as  though  slain  by  his  god. 


* In  another  it  is  Waikoroariki. 

f The  Tuahu  appears  originally  to  have  been  a pyramidical  structure,  like 
the  teocalli  ; in  New  Zealand  it  was  only  a stage  or  stone. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


251 


In  tlie  morning  Manaia  arose  from  his  sleep,,  and  went  to 
his  marae,  from  afar  he  had  seen  the  men  laid  in  a heap 
quite  dead,  he  looked  also  at  his  tuahu  as  he  passed  by,  and 
there  he  saw  Nga  toro  stretched  out  upon  it  as  an  offering  to 
his  god,  immediately  he  returned  and  called  out  to  his  peo- 
ple, oh  come  forth,  and  see  the  fulfilment  of  my  karakias  to 
Homai  Tawiti,  behold  they  are  all  slain,  and  laid  in  the 
marae  of  my  tuahu,  come  dig  out  an  oven  to  cook  our 
enemies,  who  have  been  killed  by  our  god,  Manaia  was 
deceived,  and  said,  behold  this  is  the  work  of  my  god,  heat 
the  oven  quickly  with  the  stones  of  Tuaikorora,  was  it  you 
my  enemy  who  said  that  I should  be  cooked  with  the  stones 
of  Maikukutea  ? yes,  indeed  you  shall  be  cooked  immedi- 
ately. 

Whilst  this  was  being  done,  Nga  toro  was  busily  engaged 
in  repeating  all  his  spells  on  the  tuahu ; they  continued 
digging  the  oven  to  fulfil  the  curse  upon  him,  then  suddenly 
Nga  toro  i rangi  stood  up,  and  cried  out  to  his  company, 
arise  ! let  the  slaughter  commence;  all  immediately  jumped 
up  to  slay;  the  one  hundred  and  forty  men  fell  upon  the 
multitudes  of  Manaia,  he  fled,  was  not  secured,  but  his  tribe 
was  destroyed,  two  thousand  men  were  slain  by  the  hundred 
and  forty ; the  pa  of  Tawiti  noa  fell ; the  name  of  that  battle 
is  Ihumoto  motokia,  or  bloody-nose  battle,  the  killing  being 
finished,  Nga  toro  i rangi  and  his  warriors  embarked  and 
returned  to  their  home  at  Maketu. 

After  this  Manaia  went  and  raised  a taua  to  slay  Nga 
toro  i rangi  ; he  collected  his  thousands — an  immense  army 
— and  soon  arrived  at  Maketu  with  a very  great  fleet  filled 
with  the  people  of  Hawaiki  ; they  reached  Motiti.  Nga 
toro  i rangi  and  his  wife  were  alone  in  their  house  when 
they  arrived,  his  sister's  child  saw  them,  she  ran  and  told 
her  relatives,  0 Nga  toro  i rangi,  go  out  and  look  at  the 
sea,  he  went,  and  lo,  the  sea  was  entirely  covered  with  the 
canoes  of  his  enemy ; he  cried  out,  to-morrow  let  us  fight, 
it  is  too  late  to-day,  let  down  your  anchors  outside,  let  down 
your  anchors  outside,  push  off  from  the  shore,  outside  of 
Taia,  and  anchor  there  for  the  night,  we  will  then  fight  as 


252 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


soon  as  the  day  dawns,  I cannot  be  killed  in  the  night ; he 
persuaded  him  not  to  land,  saying,  that  if  they  fought  in 
the  night  he  should  not  be  conquered,  but  if  he  waited  for 
the  day  he  might.  Manaia  said,  very  well,  the  multitudes  of 
Manaia  agreed  to  his  word  and  pushed  off  outside  the  har- 
bour and  there  anchored,  there  were  an  immense  number  of 
canoes  and  anchors,  they  let  them  all  down  into  the  sea  and 
went  to  sleep. 

Nga  toro  i rangi  returned  to  his  house ; in  the  night 
he  and  his  wife  uttered  their  spells,  she  stood  at  the  ma- 
tapihi,  to  which  she  tied  her  rope,  and  by  the  power  of 
the  spells  she  pulled  and  pulled,  and  drew  together  all  the 
winds,  the  entire  family  of  Tai-a-pawa  to  the  sea,  then  they 
all  arose  and  rushed  forth  and  stirred  up  the  waters  of  the 
ocean  from  their  very  bottom,  causing  a fearful  tempest; 
yes,  indeed,  by  the  power  of  her  spells,  she  drew  to- 
wards her  all  the  winds  of  Pungawere,  in  that  very  night 
it  blew  a hurricane,  behold  the  entire  fleet  was  destroyed, 
the  thousands  of  Manaia  were  engulphed  in  the  sea,  they 
were  overwhelmed  in  the  waves,  all  were  drowned,  not  one 
single  person  escaped. 

The  day  dawned,  Nga  toro  i rangi  went  forth  to  look  for 
Manaia,  he  beheld  the  shore  strewed  with  the  wrecks  of 
his  many  canoes  and  the  bodies  of  his  enemies,  of  Manaia 
he  only  found  his  tattoed  tumu  or  shoulder,  the  fish  had 
eaten  every  other  part  of  him ; thence  correct  is  the  song  of 
Turoa : — 

Truly  Muru  Tohanga, 

There  perished  the  thousands  of  Manaia. 

Then  Nga  toro  i rangi  uttered  this  proverb  for  Manaia  : — 
You  said  I should  be  cooked  with  the  stones  of  Waikorora- 
riki,  but  instead  of  that  you  shall  be  cooked  with  the  stones 
of  Maikukutea. 

Tradition  of  Tamatea  Pokai  Whenua,  and  the  origin 

OF  THE  NAME  OF  PuTIKI  WARANUI. 

Give  heed  to  this.  Pongokako  was  the  father  of  Tamatea, 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


253 


who  was  the  ancestor  of  all  the  tribes  of  New  Zealand;  he 
came  from  Hawaiki  in  the  Takitumu,  which  was  also 
called  Horouta ; he  first  landed  at  Turanga  on  the  fish 
which  had  been  drawn  up  by  his  ancestor  Maui ; there  he 
left  the  canoe  and  travelled  by  land,  keeping  near  the  sea 
coast,  until  he  reached  Ahuriri,  where  his  pet  crocodile 
fled  from  him  to  the  interior,  the  name  of  it  was  Tapu 
te  ranga;  Tamatea  travelled  on  thence  to  Ruahine,  the  place 
whence  his  son  Kahungunu  returned,  where  a post  was 
set  up,  the  name  of  the  pole  was  Rakautaonga;  the  cause 
of  Kahungunu^s  returning  was  that  he  saw  the  sea-gulls, 
which  had  followed  them,  flying  over  Ruahine  and  wheeling 
over  their  heads,  from  the  crying  of  the  karoro,  he  said.  Sir, 
you  proceed  on  your  way,  I shall  return  from  this  place  from 
my  regard  for  the  karoro,  which  is  crying  for  Te  Ngutuawa  o 
Ngaruroro.  Then  Tamatea,  addressing  his  son  Kahungunu 
Matangirau,  said,  do  you  feel  home-sick  ? he  replied,  no 
sir,  I am  only  sighing ; Tamatea  said,  if  love  for  our  home 
influences  you,  go  back  and  welcome,  so  Kahungunu  re- 
turned to  Heretaunga,  and  Tamatea  journeyed  on  till  he 
reached  a lofty  mountain,  where  another  of  his  pets  escaped, 
Pohokura  by  name,  an  enormous  reptile  was  that  pet ; Pu- 
keokahu  was  another;  when  he  reached  the  great  river 
Moawanga,  they  say  he  stuck  up  the  ends  of  his  firebrands 
in  it,  hence  the  saying,*  The  firebrands  of  Tamatea*  s fire ; 
these  he  left  to  turn  into  taniwas ; as  he  went  along  the 
sea  shore  his  dog  ran  into  the  sea  and  became  one;  when 
Tamatea  Pokai  Whenua  reached  Wanganui,  he  sat  down 
to  arrange  his  toilet  before  he  entered  the  pa,  and  tied 
up  the  locks  of  his  head  into  a top-knot ; from  this  circum- 
stance the  place  was  called  Putiki  Waranui  o Tamatea — 
Tamatea*  s top-knot.  Afterwards  he  paddled  up  the  Wan- 
ganui river  and  reached  the  cave  of  Tararoa,  he  threw  the 
flax  seed  upon  the  cliff,  where  it  remained ; the  flax  grew  on 
the  kotukutuku,  the  fuchsia  tree;  then  he  reached  Omaka, 
there  was  no  anchorage  there  for  his  canoe,  he  therefore 

* Fossil  trunks  of  trees  standing  up  in  the  bed  of  that  stream,  like  those 
seen  in  the  depths  of  Taupo  Lake,  are  all  named  after  ancestors. 


254 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


bent  a rock  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  to  which  he  tied  his 
cable  ; truly  that  is  the  bent  stone ; he  arrived  at  Tanpo ; 
then  he  went  on  board  a canoe,  paddled  to  the  Waikato 
river  and  reached  the  fall,  there  he  met  with  his  death,  and  so 
ended  his  travels.  His  children  were  Mahine  rangi,  Raukawa 
Wakarere ; Turanga  was  the  husband  of  Mahine  rangi ; 
Tarnatea  had  two  wives,  Iwirau  the  mother  of  Kahungunu 
Matangirau  ; the  second  wife  was  Mahakiroa  ; her  sons  were 
Koau,  Tamaekiroa,  Kahunui,  and  Apa  the  father  of  the  Nga 
ti  apa  tribe.  This  is  all  I know  of  one  of  our  ancestors, 
who  was  named  Tamatea  Pokai  Whenua,  Tarnatea  who  en- 
circled the  land,  the  great  traveller. 

Tanguru  the  Chief  of  the  Panari  ki  Rotoatara. 

Tanguru  was  a very  great  chief  of  the  Nga  ti  Kahungunu, 
he  was  an  ancestor  of  Aperahama.  There  was  a quarrel 
between  the  men  of  Rotoatara  and  of  the  Panari  with  the 
Nga  ti  Kahungunu ; the  cause  of  the  quarrel  was  land,  to 
which  they  all  had  an  equal  claim ; they  fought  at  Rotoa- 
tara, the  pa  was  taken,  Tanguru  its  chief  sought  to  escape 
upon  a moki,  a raft  made  of  bullrushes,  but  he  was  so  loaded 
with  beautiful  parawai  and  topuni,  that  the  moki  upset  and 
he  sank,  the  Nga  ti  Kahungunu  saw  him  sink,  and  raked 
the  bottom  of  the  lake  with  a marau,  eel  fork,  which  caught 
hold  of  his  garments,  he  was  pulled  up  and  placed  in  the 
canoe,  the  body  was  cut  up  and  eaten ; from  this  circum- 
stance his  tribe  acquired  the  name  of  “ Nga  ti  Marau.” 

The  Arrival  of  the  Kttia  Ruahine,  a great  Female 
Ancestor  of  the  Wanganui  Tribes. 

The  coming  of  Ruahine  from  afar,  from  Hawaiki,  was  as 
follows  : behold  she  arrived  at  the  doorway  of  the  house  of 
Ruamaunu,  immediately  they  began  to  say  to  her,  there, 
see  what  a smell  of  smoke  the  old  creature  brings  with  her ; 
disgusted  with  such  a reception,  she  at  once  left  Ruamaunu 
and  dwelt  at  Otumatua,  where  she  gave  birth  to  Tainui,  the 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


255 


ancestor  of  Ngatipotama ; this  old  lady  crossed  over  from 
Hawaiki,  sitting  astride  the  bent  neck  of  a large  calabash., 
ngutu  hue,  on  which  she  comfortably  sailed,  the  neck  of  the 
calabash  has  ever  since  remained  bent.  She  is  the  great 
ancestor  of  all  the  people  of  Ngatipotama. 

Tradition  of  Matuku  and  Witi. 

Matuku  and  Witi  were  two  great  cannibals,  after  having 
killed  and  eaten  many  persons,  Matuku  murdered  a great 
chief,  named  Waheroa,  and  carried  off  his  wife  ; Rata,  his 
son,  with  his  friends,  however,  determined  not  to  suffer  such 
a crime  to  go  unpunished,  they  therefore  went  to  the  wood, 
and  selected  a suitable  tree  for  a canoe,  that  they  might 
pursue  after  Matuku ; having  found  one,*  they  set  fire  to  it, 
and  burnt  it  down,  but  during  the  night  + Te  tini-o-te  Hake- 
turi,  Hake-turi' s flock  of  wood  fairies,  came  and  raised  it  up 
again,  they  had  therefore  a second  time  to  burn  it  down. 
Hake-turi,  however,  returned  with  his  multitude  in  the  night, 
and  again  made  the  tree  whole ; this  was  repeated  several 
times,  wondering  what  could  be  the  cause,  they  deter- 
mined to  watch ; having,  therefore,  burnt  down  the  tree, 
they  hid  themselves  near  it,  and  when  Te  tini-o-te  Hake- 
turi  appeared,  they  suddenly  made  such  a great  noise, 
that  the  little  fairies  flew  away,  some  of  the  trees  them- 
selves were  so  alarmed,  that  they  held  down  their  heads, 
and  have  never  been  able  to  raise  them  up  since ; amongst 
these  were  the  pong  a,  a fern  tree,  and  the  kareao,  supplejack, 
whose  tender  shoots  are  now  always  bent.  When  they  had 

* Another  account  states  the  tree  was  chopped  down,  and  the  Haketuri 
uttered  this  spell,  by  which  it  was  restored  whole  again  : — 

Eere  mai  te  mara  mara,  Fly  together,  O ye  chips, 

Koi  whetau  Stick  ye  fast  together, 

Toro  tika  Rise  and  stand  upright  again 

E tu  te  maota.  A perfect  tree. 

f Te  tini-o-te  Hake-turi  appear  to  have  been  a kind  of  fairies,  in  the  form  of 
small  birds,  and  in  very  large  nnmbers.  In  the  myth  of  Tawaki,  Tongo  hiti  is 
spoken  of  as  being  the  chief  of  a similar  race,  although  he  himself  was  a glow 


worm. 


256 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


adzed  out  the  canoe  Punui,*  sewed  on  the  top  sides,,  and  got 
everything  ready  to  go  to  sea,  they  found  the  thicket  was 


so  dense,  that  it  could  not 
repeated  this  karakia  :■ — 

Waea  turihunga, 

Waea  taramoa, 

Ka  puta  ki  waho, 

Ko  Witi  ko  Matuku, 


be  launched.  They  therefore 

Thrust  aside  the  thicket, 

Thrust  aside  the  brambles, 

And  Witi  and  Matuku 
Shall  come  forth,  f 


The  thicket  immediately  opened,  but  in  vain  did  Rata  call 
out,  pull  away,  pull  away,  the  canoe  would  not  move,  in  vain 
did  they  hawl,  not  an  inch  would  it  stir ; Rata  had  dammed 
up  the  stream,  but  there  was  not  sufficient  water  to  make  it 
float,  then  they  karakiad  to  the  god  of  rain,  he  called  to 
the  sky,  pull  out  the  plug  of  the  reservoir  of  rain  ; he  had 
no  sooner  uttered  the  words  than  down  came  the  torrents 
filled  the  river,  floated  the  canoe  of  Rata,  the  warriors 
embarked,  it  glided  along,  reached  the  open  sea,  and  they 
pulled  over  to  Matukffis  residence ; on  arriving  at  the 
place,  where  they  expected  to  find  him,  they  discovered 
that  he  was  from  home,  but  the  woman  they  were  in  search 
of  was  within ; they  asked  her  how  they  might  most  easily 
capture  Matuku ; she  advised  them  to  place  a large  noose 
over  the  door,  and  conceal  themselves  in  the  sides  of  the 
house  ; but  she  recommended  them  by  no  means  to  attempt 
to  catch  him  by  the  neck,  but  by  the  waist,  as  in  the  former 
part  he  was  too  strong  to  be  held ; they  soon  heard  him 
coming,  for  he  made  the  ground  shake  under  his  feet  as  he 
went  along,  he  had  a load  of  human  flesh  on  his  shoulders, 
which  he  threw  down  as  he  approached  the  door ; the 
woman  called  to  him,  but  suspecting  some  treachery,  he 
said : — 

* This  canoe  had  three  other  names  : — 

The  first,  Riwaru,  because  the  damp  of  the  forest  made  it  green. 

The  second,  Tuirangi,  when  it  reached  the  sea,  it  was  painted  and  orna- 
mented. 

The  third,  Pakawai,  when  it  was  drawn  up  on  shore. 

f This  is  a saying  for  the  beginning  of  a quarrel : — Push  aside  the  barriers, 
and  anger  will  burst  out. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


257 


Piro  piro  haungaunga  taku  kai,  lie  tangata. — I scent  my  food 
— a man.  She  assured  him  all  was  right,  so  he  crept  in  on  his 
hands  and  knees  ; as  soon  as  he  got  his  head  and  shoulders  in, 
they  drew  the  noose  tight  and  secured  him,  and  cut  off  one  of 
his  hands,  but  he  told  them  they  could  not  kill  him,  this  he 
repeated,  as  each  limb  was  chopped  off,  but  when  at  last  his 
head  was  severed,  he  died,  and  according  to  some  accounts, 
was  changed  into  the  bittern,  which  still  goes  by  his  name. 
When  he  was  dead,  the  warriors  asked  the  woman  how 
they  might  also  capture  Witi,  she  told  them  where  they 
would  find  his  den,  and  said,  that  if  they  placed  a noose 
over  it,  and  made  a noise,  the  monster  would  be  sure  to 
come  out  and  attack  them,  as  he  did  every  one  who  came 
near  his  abode,  they  did  as  she  advised,  and  when  he  put 
out  his  head,  they  immmediately  drew  the  cord  tight  and 
despatched  him  with  ease. 


Tradition  oe  Kupe  and  Turi. 

The  first  person  who  reached  New  Zealand,  is  acknow- 
ledged by  all  to  have  been  Kupe  : he  came  in  the  canoe 
Mata-o-rua  to  Wanganui-a-te-ra,  seeking  his  wife  Kura 
Marotina,  who  had  been  carried  off  by  his  younger  brother 
Hoturapa,  he  went  from  the  place  of  his  landing  as  far  as 
Patea,  there  he  heard  the  cry  of  the  kokako  inland,  and 
mistook  it  for  the  call  of  a man,  hua  noa  he  reo  te  tangata, 
a man's  voice,  he  exclaimed,  and  sent  to  see  who  it  could  be, 
but  found  no  one,  not  seeing  anything  of  her,  he  set  up  a 
post  there,  and  returned  to  Wanganui-a-te-ra. 

Kupe  was  accompanied  by  Hau,  on  landing  he  found  the 
ground  soft  and  trembling,*  he  was  afraid,  and  therefore 
went  on  till  he  came  to  the  Wairarapa,  a rocky  part  of  the 
island  which  was  firm,  he  left  his  daughters  Mateu  and  Ma- 

* Kupe  is  said  to  have  overtaken  the  land,  it  was  floating  along  the  surface  of 
the  sea  when  he  came  up  to  it,  and  his  first  work  was  to  render  it  firm  and 
stationary. 

S 


258 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


koro  there ; the  latter,  after  giving  name  to  a pa,  returned 
to  Hawaiki,  because  she  grieved  for  her  children  left  behind. 
Mateu  went  on  the  mountain  and  cried,  and  whatever  she 
touched  was  covered  with  blood  from  her  wounded  feet.  Pua- 
tiki  was  also  a son  of  Kupe,  and  Taiapua,  another  of  his 
daughters,  who  killed  herself  at  the  red  cliff  Tamure.  Some 
time  afterwards  Kupe  came  there  and  bewailed  her  death, 
cutting  his  forehead  with  obsidian  for  grief,  the  blood  flowed 
upon  the  surrounding  rocks  which  were  dyed  red,  and  have 
continued  so  ever  since : those  rocks  are  seen  in  sailing 
through  Cook’s  Straits,  a little  before  entering  the  heads  of 
Port  Nicholson,  and  are  very  conspicuous  by  their  color. 

After  this  there  were  two  pas  built  at  Patea ; Raumana 
was  seated  on  a neck  of  land  jutting  out  into  the  sea,  Ran- 
gitane,  the  other  pa,  stood  at  a little  distance  ; a quarrel 
arose  between  the  two  places,  and  the  former  being  the 
strongest,  bid  the  people  of  the  other  depart;  they  asked 
them  for  canoes  as  they  had  none  of  their  own,  but  they  were 
refused ; then  the  people  of  Rangitane  cut  a trench  across 
the  neck  of  land  which  separated  their  place  from  that  of 
Raumana,  and  made  four  large  wedges  of  hard  wood,  which 
they  karakiad  over,  and  drove  into  the  ground,  the  land 
split  in  two,  and  half  with  the  pa  of  their  enemies  sank  into 
the  sea  and  all  perished ; others  say  the  land  floated  and 
became  a moutere,  island,  and  drifted  to  Rotoma,  where  it 
remained  stationary,  the  marks  of  these  wedges  on  the  lofty 
cliff  are  still  to  be  seen  at  Patea ; so  saith  my  informant. 

Thence  he  again  returned  to  Hawaiki ; hence  the  saying — 

Hoki  Kupe,  e kore  ia  e hokimai, 

Come  back,  Kupe,  he  cannot  return. 


Several  extraordinary  works  are  attributed  to  him  ; such 
as  severing  the  two  islands  asunder,  thus  forming  Cook's 
Straits,  and  also  cutting  off  New  Zealand  from  Hawaiki, 
with  which  it  was  said  to  have  been  previously  united.  (May 
there  not  be  here  preserved  some  remembrance  of  a grand 
Southern  Continent  having  been  submerged) . 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


259 


Ka  tito  an,  ka  tito  au,  ka  tito  au, 
Kia  Kupe  te  tangata, 

Nana  i tope  tope  te  whenua, 

Tu  ke  a Kapiti, 

Tu  ke  Mana, 

Tu  ke  Ara  pawa. 

Ko  nga  tohu  tena, 

A taku  tupuna, 

A Knpe,  nana  i waka-tomene 
Titapua, 

Ka  tomene  an  te  wkenua-e-. 


I sing,  I sing,  I sing, 

Of  Knpe,  the  man 
Who  cut  off  the  land, 
Stands  apart  Kapiti, 
Stands  apart  Mana, 
Stands  apart  Ara  pawa. 
These  are  the  signs 
Of  my  ancestor, 

Of  Kupe,  who  went  over 
Titapua, 

Who  went  over  the  land. 


It  was  from  the  account  Kupe  gave  when  he  reached 
Hawaiki,  that  other  canoes  came  ; six  are  said  to  have 
arrived  together.  The  chief  of  this  second  expedition  was 
Turf,  he  is  universally  allowed  to  have  been  the  first  person 
who  settled  on  the  western  coast ; and  by  all  the  inhabitants 
of  that  part,  was  regarded  as  a kind  of  demigod.* 

Turi  is  said  to  have  fled  from  Hawaiki  on  account  of  a 
quarrel,  Popouakoako,  his  younger  brother,  at  the  ingather- 
ing of  the  kumara,  presented  one  to  Uenuku,  the  ariki, 
god  of  the- rainbow,  who  was  so  indignant  at  the  smallness 
of  the  gift,  that  he  swallowed  both  it  and  the  offerer  to- 
gether. Turi,  in  his  anger,  slew  Oe-potiki,  the  son  of  Uen- 
uku, and  eat  him  ; the  manawa  or  lungs  he  carried  to  Uenuku, 
who  having  eaten  them,  perceived  they  were  those  of  his  own 
son ; he  then  uttered  a powerful  spell ; Kongo  rongo,  the 
wife  of  Turi,  overheard  him  utter  this  karakia  : — 


Horu  horu  taka  manawa  i a 
Hawe  Potiki, 

Ka  utaina  ki  runga  te  wata 
a maia, 

Runa  mai  rongoe,  runa  mai 
rongoe,  hae, 


My  spirit  shudders  for  Hawe 
Potiki. 

I place  his  liver  on  the  altar, 
and  listen, 

Great  be  the  assembling,  great 
be  the  assemblage  to  avenge 
his  death. 


* When  Turi  also  arrived  he  found  the  land  still  soft,  it  had  not  been  quite 
dry  and  firm,  for  as  my  informant  stated,  it  was  very  soon  after  Noah’s  flood 
that  he  came. 

s 2 


260 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


Turi  then  sent  her  back  to  listen,  when  she  heard  the 
second  spell : — 

Tikina  atu  te  tini  o nga  ti  Bring  me  the  many, 
rongotea, 

Wakataka  mai,  kia  tini,  Of  nga  ti  rongo  tea, 

Kia  mano,  Let  many,  let  a multitude  fall, 

Kia  ngakia  te  mate  oe-potiki,  Let  oe-potiki  work  death. 

Koreka  te  kai  mua,  The  first  vengeance 

Runa  mai  rongo  e — , Is  sweet,  assemble 

Ka  runa  ha-i Let  all  who  hear  assemble. 

When  Turi  heard  that  this  karakia  had  been  uttered,  he 
went  and  brought  his  canoe,  Aotea,  from  his  father-in-law, 
Toto,*  Turi  embarked,  but  he  forgot  in  his  haste  the  tata , 
baler,  of  his  canoe,  which  was  called  Tupua  oronoku ; his 
paddle  was  named  Kautu  hi  te  rangi.  The  pukeko,  the  rat, 
the  green  paroquet,  the  moeone,  a small  bronze  beetle,  the 
awato,  the  grub  of  a sphinx  moth,  which  preys  on  the 
kumara,  the  kumara,  the  karaka,  the  native  calabash,  were 
taken  with  him,  also  his  god,  who  was  carried  by  his  priest 
Tapo ; but  before  he  had  proceeded  far,  he  pushed  Tapo 
into  the  sea,  for  his  supposed  filthiness.  Maru  grumbled  at 
the  unjust  slight  showed  to  him,  and  said  by  the  mouth 
of  Tapo,  if  you  leave  without  my  servant  on  board,  you  will 
never  reach  Nukuroa,  New  Zealand ; place  me  on  the  out- 
rigger, tu  ama , and  we  shall  reach  Uku-rangi,  New  Zealand. 
Turi  consented  and  took  him  again  on  board;  he  went  on 
shore  at  Motiwatiwa,  there  he  killed  his  dog  Iki  iki  rawea, 
there  Potoru  eat  him,  became  deranged  by  doing  so,  and 
was  lost  with  his  canoe  in  the  Gulph  of  Parata.f 

Turi  landed  at  Wangaparaoa,  where  he  planted  the  karaka, 

* Another  tradition  states,  that  Toto  built  his  canoe  in  a small  river  named 
Tau-toru,  and  when  finished,  gave  it  to  his  son-in-law  Turi,  who  made  a sail 
for  it,  which  they  called  Mata  o rua , and  sailed  to  Witi  Marama. 

f Te  Waha  o te  Parata.  It  was  supposed  that  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide 
is  occasioned  by  the  ocean  rushing  down  the  throat  of  Parata  and  being 
vomited  out  again  ; in  this  way  a very  broken  sea  was  supposed  to  be  occa- 
sioned. Kupe  had  a narrow  escape  from  the  Korokoro  o Parata  ; hence  the 
saying,  no  canoe  can  go  where  Kupe  went. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


261 


thence  he  sailed  to  the  Aupouri,  North  Cape,  thence  to 
Aotea,  and  there  he  left  his  canoe,  which  was  turned  into  a 
rock,  and  is  still  to  be  seen ; he  went  inland,  and  named 
all  the  rivers ; Kawia,  Marakopa,  Mokau,  Moakatino,  Tanga- 
porutu,  Mimi,  Biui,  Waitara,  Wai  o ngana,  Wai  Wakaio, 
Kau  pokonui,  Puni,  Waingongoro,  Tangahoe,  Hinga  hape, 
so  called  from  his  slipping  there,  a most  appropriate  name, 
the  descent  to  this  river  being  over  a very  slippery  rock. 
Turi  named  all  the  rivers  from  Aotea  to  Patea,  and  Hou, 
those  from  that  place  to  Wairarapa;  at  Patea  he  first  built 
his  house,  and  called  it  Matangirei,  he  planted  the  kumara, 
at  a spot  called  Heke  heke  i papa,  where  he  saw  Kupe^s  post, 
which  stood  on  Eangi  tawhi ; he  took  up  some  of  the  soil 
in  his  hand,  and  smelt  it,  calling  it  a rich  soil,  hence  the 
saying  for  good  ground,  this  is  the  earth  that  Turi  smelt ; 
there  his  dog,  Mata  Ware  was  killed  ; he  said  to  Taneroa,  his 
daughter,  either  your  husband  or  children  have  stolen  it, 
at  this  word  Taneroa  fled,  and  went  to  live  at  Papawero, 
where  she  had  two  children;  she  said  to  them,  when  you 
grow  up,  there  will  be  food  enough  for  you  at  Pawaira-ra, 
on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  at  the  place  of  my  brother, 
Turanga  i mua.  Turi  and  his  son  slew*  the  men  of  this 
island ; the  name  of  that  race  was  the  Kohi-kohi. 

When  Turi  left  his  pa,  with  all  his  people,  to  fish  or  work 
in  his  cultivation,  that  his  enemies  might  not  be  aware  of  their 
departure,  in  order  to  deceive  them  he  placed  a matuku,  or 
bittern,  in  it,  so  that  when  any  one  came  they  might  hear 
the  cry  of  the  bird — hu,  hu,  hu,  and  fancy  he.  was  at  home  ; 
to  strengthen  the  matuku  in  the  defence  of  his  pa,  he  uttered 
the  following  incantation  : — 

Ko  te  Matuku  i hea  The  bittern  from  whence, 

Te  Matuku  i Waiaua,  The  bittern  of  Wai  aua, 

* That  there  were  inhabitants  of  the  land  before  the  arrival  of  the  Maori 
race  appears  highly  probable,  since  they  not  only  state  as  much  in  their  tradi- 
tions, but  also  record  their  having  gradually  driven  away  a race  far  inferior  to 
themselves,  and  compelled  it  finally  to  take  refuge  in  the  Chatham  Isles.  This 
despised  people,  by  way  of  reproach,  were  called  Kiri  waka  papa,  which  may 
be  translated  bare  sides,  from  its  ignorance  of  clothing.  (See  page  13.) 


262 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


He  Matuku,  aha  te  Matuku, 
Matuku  tan  tiaki, 

Tau  aroaki,  Tau  aroaki. 

Te  waka  rangona  manawa, 
Te  korero  te  wakarongona 
a te  Wananga, 
Wakatikaia,  kia  tika,  Waka- 
tonu  hia 

Kia  tonn  han  e kia  tonu, 

Ko  te  Matuku  i hea, 

Ko  te  Matuku  i Waingon- 
goro,  &c. 


The  bittern,  what  of  the  bittern  ? 
The  bittern,  the  guardian, 

The  overlooker,  the  overseer, 

The  imitator  of  the  hum  of  men, 
Let  your  voice  resound, 

That  the  enemy  may  be  deceived, 

Be  quite  correct ; be  perfectly 
correct,  your  imitation, 

The  bittern  from  whence, 

The  bittern  from  Waingongoro, 
&c. 


This  was  repeated  to  each  of  these  rivers,  Tangahoe,  Hinga- 
hapa  Patea,  Whenua-kura,  Waitotara.  When  the  Matuku 
heard  this  incantation  of  Turi,  he  was  strengthened  to  cry, 
hu,  hu,  hu,  in  the  pa,  and  thus  those  who  came,  hearing  his 
voice,  thinking  it  was  Turi,  were  afraid  and  fled  away. 

A great  love  for  Hawaiki,  his  country,  then  seized  Turi; 
he  committed  suicide  in  the  Patea  by  drowning  himself, 
so  concludes  the  tradition.  The  sites  of  Turks  house,  Ma- 
tangirei,  and  his  kumara  farm,  at  Patea,  are  still  pointed 
out ; and  an  old  man  living  there  said,  that  in  his  early  days, 
the  land  marks,  which  were  sculptured  stones,  sixty  in 
number,  still  remained ; but  when  the  Gospel  came,  they 
destroyed  them  all.  Turks  well  is  yet  in  existence. 


Tradition  oe  Nga  Hui  and  Tama  te  Kapua. 

Nga  hui  came  from  Hawaiki  to  see  a quarrel  between  the 
Mata  and  the  Pounamu,  which  had  its  origin  in  that  island  ; 
he  landed  on  the  East  Coast,  at  Wangaparau,  and  came  to 
Tauranga,  and  from  thence  to  the  Wairere  and  Taupo  ; he 
afterwards  crossed  over  to  Kapiti,  Arapawa,  and  Arahura, 
near  Wakatupa;  when  he  reached  that  place,  he  obtained 
the  Pounamu,  green  stone,  in  a lifeless  state,  and  there  he 
laid  hold  of  the  Kaukau  matua  and  Tukurangi,  from  thence 
he  returned  to  the  Arawa  Mountains,  there  was  the  moa 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


263 


at  the  waterfall,  he  killed  it,  and  put  it  into  a taha, 
bark  basket,  and  went  back  to  Hawaiki,  telling  the  chiefs, 
Tama  te  kapua,  Nga  toro  i rangi,  and  Hotu  roa,  he  had 
found  the  fine  country  Aotea  roa,  the  large  island ; they 
said  to  him,  how  shall  we  cross  over  to  it  ? he  replied, 
build  canoes  ; the  canoes  were  commenced,  the  first, 
Arawa ; the  second,  Tainui ; the  third,  Aotea  roa ; the 
fourth,  Taki-tumu ; the  fifth,  Kura-haupo ; the  sixth,  Ton- 
gamaru,  when  finished  they  all  left  Hawaiki  together ; but 
whilst  they  were  putting  on  the  haumi,  or  stern  of  one  of 
them,  which  is  a separate  piece,  joined  on  to  the  end,  they 
accidentally  killed  Mania's  son,  whose  name  was  Tutenana- 
hauj  the  builders  of  the  canoes  were  therefore  anxious  to 
complete  them  as  quick  as  possible,  and  get  away  before  the 
child  was  missed ; being  a chief  child,  he  was  in  the  habit 
of  going  about  visiting  his  friends,  and  staying  away  ten 
days  at  a time,  they  knew  that  he  would  not  be  missed  for 
some  time,  and  therefore  made  haste,  and  paddled  away  from 
Hawaiki,  having  buried  the  child  near  the  place  where  they 
adzed  out  their  canoes.* 

The  Arawa  first  sailed ; its  chief,  Tama  te  Kapua,  called 
Nga  toro  i rangi,  to  come  and  eat  their  food  at  sea,  or 
tujpekej  that  is,  taking  away  the  tapu,  by  making  it  noa 
for  them  to  eat  on  the  voyage,  which  they  could  not  have 
done  till  the  principal  chief  removed  its  sanctity,  that  the 
voyage  might  be  prosperous,  they  succeeded  in  persuading 
Nga  toro  i rangi  to  go  on  board,  also  his  wife  Kearoa,  so  he 
went  with  them  to  Aotea  roa.  Nga  toro  i rangi  did  not  live 
inside  the  canoe,  being  too  sacred  a person,  but  on  the  top, 
the  canoes  having  houses  built  on  them  with  side  poles, 
probably  out-riggers,  and  roofed  with  raupo  ; they  landed 
at  Wangaparau,  thence  went  on  to  Waka-tane,  and  Maketu, 
there  they  left  the  Arawa,  where  she  has  ever  since  re- 
mained turned  into  stone.  The  Tainui  proceeded  to  Kawia, 

* Another  account  states,  that  this  boy  was  not  killed  by  accident,  but  de- 
signedly, by  Hoturoa,  for  mocking  his  work  as  he  was  adzing  out  his  canoe  ; 
and  that  he  buried  him  on  the  spot,  strewing  the  chips  of  his  canoe  over  it  to 
avoid  detection. 


264 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


its  chief  was  Hoturoa.  The  Aotea  roa  remained  for  a time 
at  Hauraki,  and  thence  sailed  to  Otahnhn  in  company  with 
the  Tainui  and  Tonga  maru,  where  they  hauled  the  canoe 
across  the  isthmus,*  the  Aotea  roa  remained  at  Aotea ; the 
Tainui  at  Kawia  ; and  the  Tonga  maru  at  Nga  ti  awa. 

Some  time  after  they  left  Hawaiki,  the  young  child  Tute 
nangahau,  Mania’s  son,  was  missed,  but  they  could  not  dis- 
cover what  had  become  of  him,  until  Tuparaunui,  a large  fly 
and  an  ancient  god,  came  to  their  aid,  by  his  exquisite 
power  of  smell,  he  found  out  where  he  was  buried,  and  by 
his  low  thrilling  sound  over  the  spot,  enabled  them  to  dis- 
cover the  poor  child’s  remains. 

* From  the  Tamaki  to  Manukau  there  is  a portage  of  not  more  than  a 
quarter  of  a mile,  called  Ota  huhu  ; by  dragging  their  canoes  across  this,  they 
passed  from  the  Eastern  Sea  to  the  Western. 


HE  TIEHERU,  OR  BOAT  SCOOP. 


A VIEW  ON  THE  MANGA-NUI-A-TE-AO,  A TRIBUTARY  OF  THE  WANGANUI. 


CHAPTER  XY. 

TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 

(continued.) 

The  Arrival  op  the  Nga  toro  i rangi  prom  Hawaiki 
IN  T^LE  ArAWA. 

Listen  to  me,  tliis  is  a tradition  of  our  forefathers  which 
we  have  heard  : — 

Hei  and  Tia  conceived  the  desire  of  making  themselves  a 
canoe,  when  they  lived  in  Hawaiki,  the  name  of  the  canoe 
was  Te  Arawa ; the  cause  of  their  leaving  was  Rahuitara  a 
manaia,  the  name  of  a bloody  battle ; before  departing  they 
sent  for  Nga  toro  i rangi,  as  a priest  for  their  canoe,  then 


266 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


they  sailed ; Hou  mai  i tawiti  said,  Friends,  go  to  the  other 
side  of  Tu,  who  is  blowing,  keep  constantly  steering  in  that 
direction,  carry  with  you  the  grub  Huhu,  the  Popo,  but  the 
Hanehane,  a weapon,  bury  that  in  the  earth ; Nga  toro 
sat  in  the  stern,  Kearoa  his  wife,  and  Tama  te  kapua  were 
below ; at  sea  they  misbehaved,  and  caused  the  Arawa  to 
be  drawn  into  the  Waha  o te  Parata , the  mouth  of  Parata,* 
as  a punishment.  Ika  cried  out,  Oh  Toro  oh,  the  pillow 
of  Kearoa  has  fallen,  Nga  toro  cried,  lay  hold  of  it  that  it 
may  be  fastened  ; Ika  stood  up  in  the  prow  and  uttered  his 
karakia;  Nga  toro  stood  up  in  the  stern  and  used  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

Loose  the  sacred  post, 

The  post  of  Rongomai  whiti, 

Why  do  you  not  hearken, 

Bound  is  Kahika  to  the  post  before, 

To  the  post  in  the  midst, 

To  the  post  Wharawa  (sleeping  shed). 

Distant  Heaven  opposed. 

The  spell  of  Kga  toro  saved  the  Arawa,  behold  they  sailed 
opposite  to  Wangaparaoa,  they  saw  there  the  Kata,  and 
exclaimed,  it  is  kura,  red  ochre ; Tauninihi  threw  their 
ochre  into  the  sea,  mistaking  the  bright  scarlet  blossom 
of  the  Pohutukawa  for  it,  expecting  to  find  abundance 
on  shore ; they  sailed  thence  close  to  Aotea,  the  great 
barrier ; there  they  left  Muranui,  one  of  their  company, 
and  sailing  further  reached  Repanga,  there  they  left  their 
slaves,  Mumukau  and  Takereti,  and  arrived  opposite 
Maunganui,  Tauranga.  The  dog  of  Tarawhata  jumped 
into  the  water,  and  afterwards  he  followed  it : this  was  the 
spell  which  he  uttered  while  swimming : — 

Swims,  swims  Tarawhata,  eh. 

Both  reached  the  shore,  and  landed  at  Maunganui ; the 
anchorage  of  the  Arawa  was  there,  hence  the  name  Tau- 
ranga ; they  coasted  along  the  shore,  Hei  stood  up  and 

* A great  gulf  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean,  supposed  to  cause  the  ebb  and 
flow  of  the  tide.  (See  Note  page  260). 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


267 


said,  leave  that  country  which  lies  there,  as  a resting- 
place  for  my  child  Waitaka ; Tia  stood  up  and  said,  leave 
the  land  which  is  spread  out  there  as  a resting-place  for 
my  child  Tapuika ; Tama  te  Kapua  stood  up,  and  said, 
leave  that  promontory  which  lies  there  as  the  point  of  my 
nose,  truly  that  is  the  name  of  JNga  Kurai,  Maketu  point ; 
they  landed  on  Motiti,  the  island  of  Maketu,  and  dragged 
the  Arawa  on  shore ; the  crew  stood  up  and  tied  its  cable, 
Te  Hau  painted  it  on  Motitinui,  near  to  Hoieke  ; they  dwelt 
there  and  raised  their  Tuahu,  called  Taumaihi ; their  gods 
were  Hani  and  Puna ; afterwards  they  sailed  thence,  landed 
on  the  main  land,  and  hauled  the  Arawa  on  shore ; its  crew 
stood  up,  fastened  its  cable,  and  sang  the  song  : — 

Kua  keria  te  awa  i Maketu  nui  e Tupiahoieke. 

The  river  from  great  Maketu  was  dug  hard  by  Tupahoieke. 

They  dwelt  at  Maketu,  and  thence  separated ; Uruhika,  the 
priest,  from  whom  the  idea  of  coming  arose,  and  after  him 
Matamoko  went  to  look  for  suitable  spots  to  live  in,  after- 
wards this  man,  that  man,  this  man,  that  man,  each  went  to 
select  a spot  for  himself ; Hei  and  Tia  dwelt  apart  from 
Maketu,  there  Raumati  came  and  burnt  the  Arawa  with  fire 
(but  the  accounts  vary  as  to  the  name  of  the  person  who  did 
it,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  done).  When  Hatupatu, 
the  famous  hero  living  at  Rotorua,  heard  of  it,  he  came 
and  slew  Raumati,  carried  off  his  head,  and  returned  to 
his  home. 

A Tale  oe  tbe  Patupaiarehe  oe  Pirongia. 

There  was  a man  whose  name  was  Ruarangi,  and  Tawhaiti 
was  his  wife,  they  were  the  only  persons  living  in  the 
kainga  with  their  two  sons ; one  of  these  died,  but  they 
still  continued  in  the  same  place  ; Ruarangi' s employ- 
ment was  shooting  birds.  Behold  the  patupaiarehe  came 
to  the  kainga  and  surprised  the  child  and  its  mother,  they 
carried  off  the  mother,  so  that  when  Ruarangi  returned 
she  was  gone,  he  questioned  the  child,  where  is  your 


268 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


mother  ? he  replied,  she  is  gone ; great  was  his  sorrow  ! 
he  and  his  child  wept.  Behold,  during  the  night  the 
spirit  of  the  child  which  had  died  came  and  sat  on  the  ridge 
pole  of  the  house  : What  are  you  both  crying  about  ? they 
replied,  for  your  mother,  who  is  gone ; cease  your  weep- 
ing, I will  tell  you  what  to  do  : go,  said  he,  when  you 
reach  the  first  river,  the  second  river,  the  third  river,  stop 
there  and  light  a fire,  and  when  you  have  caught  a pig, 
throw  it  on  the  fire.  Ruarangi  went  and  arrived  at  the  first 
river,  at  the  second,  and  at  the  third  river,  he  stopped  and 
there  lighted  his  fire,  an  exceeding  great  one,  he  then 
caught  a pig  and  threw  it  on  it ; the  smoke  of  the  fire 
penetrated  into  the  forest,  with  the  smell  of  the  pig. 

Tawhaitu  perceived  the  smell  of  the  fire,  she  wept,  saying. 
Yes,  indeed,  whence  this  smoke  of  fire,  perhaps  it  is  from 
Ruarangi ; she  began  to  follow  the  scent  of  the  fire  until 
she  reached  him ; they  returned  together  to  their  home. 
Tawhaitu  said  to  her  husband,  you  must  be  strong  to  retain 
me,  for  by  and  bye  the  patupaiarehe  will  return  ; before  long 
he  came  and  took  her  away  and  departed. 

Ruarangi  and  his  child  wept  during  the  night ; the  spirit 
of  the  child  returned,  and  enquired,  what  are  you  two  cry- 
ing about  ? they  answered,  we  are  lamenting  for  Tawhaitu, 
who  has  gone  ; he  said,  give  over  crying,  set  off,  and  when 
you  have  arrived  at  the  first  river,  the  second  and  the 
third,  then  light  a fire,  carry  a pot  and  calabash  with  you, 
having  reached  the  place,  kill  a pig,  singe  it ; having 
finished  the  singeing,  fry  it  in  the  pot,  then  go  into  the 
river  and  dig  red  ochre  ; this  being  done,  fry  together 
the  fat  and  the  ochre,  and  pour  it  into  the  calabash,  and 
carry  it  home.  When  he  had  done  this,  the  smoke  reached 
Tawhaitu,  she  wept,  and  said,  from  Ruarangi  perhaps  is  this 
smoke  of  the  fire ; she  followed  the  smell,  and  when  she 
reached  him  they  both  worked  the  red  ochre,  and  said,  we 
must  make  haste,  lest  the  evening  should  overtake  us;  when 
they  got  home  they  painted  all  their  house  with  it,  the  ridge 
pole  of  the  house  only  being  left.  When  the  patupaiarehe 
came  he  stood  on  the  other  side  of  the  fence ; great  was 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


269 


his  fear  of  the  red  ochre,  he  went  from  one  side  to  the 
other,  seeking  a way  by  which  he  might  enter  the  house, 
but  could  not  find  one,  the  only  thing  he  could  do  was  to 
fell  a tree,  so  that  it  should  touch  the  ridge  pole,  by  it 
he  climbed  up,  but  when  he  got  upon  it  still  there  was  no 
entrance  for  him  into  the  house ; this  was  all,  he  sung  his 
song,  and  said  : — The  heaven  cannot  be  pressed  down  from 
above,  the  rope  of  New  Zealand  which  I had  stretched  out  is 
brought  very  near ; the  love  for  Pirongia  still  remains ; the 
divided  race  split  into  two  parts,  (Mount)  Tiki  and  (Mount) 
Nukupore  ; will  the  union  of  the  two  be  sacred  ? Ripiroaite 
will  push  me  away,  the  (Rangi  pouri)  gloomy  sky. 

This  story  is  evidently  a very  recent  one,  and  it  appears  to 
have  been  composed  during  this  struggle  of  the  two  races. 
The  Patupaiarehe  is  a kind  of  semi- spiritual  being,  supposed 
to  reside  in  lonely  places,  they  are  thought  to  be  white, 
and  therefore  an  apt  representation  of  the  European ; the 
woman  represents  New  Zealand,  and  her  husband  the  Maori 
race ; the  instruction  given  by  the  spirit  appears  to  be  to 
return  to  their  old  heathen  customs  ; the  Kokowai  being  the 
emblem  of  the  tapu,  against  which  all  the  skill  of  the  Pakeha 
is  vain ; Ripiroaite  may  represent  their  great  champion. 


Mahina. 

The  Kura , red  ochre,  was  brought  from  Hawaiki  in  the 
Arawa  ; when  they  approached  the  land  they  saw  the  Pohu- 
tukawa  and  Rata  in  full  bloom,  their  brilliant  red  blossoms 
were  taken  for  kura,  and  they  cried  out,  what  was  the  good 
of  our  bringing  kura  here  where  it  is  so  abundant  ? they 
threw  it  overboard,  but  when  they  landed  they  found  out 
their  mistake,  and  vainly  regretted  their  loss.  Mahina, 
however,  was  walking  along  the  beach,  and  picked  up  the 
kura  which  had  drifted  ashore ; when  this  was  known  the 
owner  asked  him  to  give  it  back,  but  he  refused,  and  said, 
what  is  drifted  ashore  is  the  property  of  the  finder,  hence 
the  proverb  for  anything  lost,  which  has  been  picked  up  by 


270 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


another  who  keeps  it : Me  aha  te  kura  pae  a Mahina  ? — 
What  does  it  signify,  is  it  not  like  the  kura  of  Mahina  which 
drifted  ashore  ? 


Pare  and  Hutu. 

There  was  once  a very  beautiful  woman  named  Pare,  a 
great  lady  was  she,  living  in  her  own  house ; there  were 
three  fences  around  it,  and  the  house  was  beautifully  carved 
and  ornamented.  The  reason  she  lived  single  was,  that  she 
might  be  the  head  chief  of  her  tribe,  and  also  because  there 
was  no  one  in  it  who  was  equal  to  her  in  rank  ; when  her 
food  was  brought  it  was  given  to  one  servant,  who  handed 
it  to  another,  and  then  to  a third,  who  presented  it  to 
Pare.  Inside  her  house  she  had  everything  to  make  it  nice, 
beautiful  mats,  parawais,  kaitakas,  and  topunis,  with  every 
kind  of  perfume,  even  to  that  of  the  kawa  kawa. 

On  a certain  day  the  tribe  had  various  games,  such  as 
striking  the  ball  and  throwing  the  tekateka.  When  a great 
chief  named  Hutu  came  and  played  with  the  ball  and  teka- 
taka,  so  great  was  his  agility  in  these  amusements  that  he 
always  surpassed  every  one  else,  which  excited  the  admira- 
tion of  the  tribe  at  his  wonderful  skill ; they  applauded  him 
loudly,  Pare  heard  them,  and  a desire  seized  her  to  go  to  the 
verandah  of  her  house  to  see  Hutu  throwing  the  stick, 
one  fell  close  to  her,  which  she  picked  up  ; Hutu  came 
to  look  for  it,  but  when  he  reached  her  house  she  would  not 
restore  it.  Hutu  said,  give  me  my  stick.  Pare  replied, 
come  into  the  house  and  talk,  for  great  is  my  regard  for 
you,  but  Hutu  declined,  because  he  was  married,  and  had 
a family,  but  Pare  said,  what  does  that  signify  when  my 
regard  for  you  is  so  great  on  account  of  your  skill  in  all  the 
different  games  ; for  yours  only  was  the  ball  which  whizzed  as 
it  went,  and  yours  was  the  stick  which  flew  with  force,  there- 
fore, great  is  my  admiration.. 

They  strove  together,  but  Hutu  persisted  in  repelling  all 
her  advances ; Pare  asked,  why  are  you  so  indifferent  since 
my  love  for  you  is  so  great  ? still  Hutu  refused,  but  Pare 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


271 


went  and  shut  the  door  of  her  house  ; Hutu  said  he  must 
go,  Pare  followed  him;  when  he  got  outside  he  said,  stay 
you  there  and  I will  shortly  return,  Hutu  left,  and  con- 
tinued fleeing  away,  Pare  saw  that  he  was  deserting  her, 
then  she  uttered  her  last  words  to  him  : go  then,  0 Hutu, 
go  to  your  home,  Pare  returned  to  her  house,  and  having 
reached  it  called  her  servants  and  set  her  house  in  order, 
putting  everything  in  its  proper  place,  and  then  went  and 
strangled  herself. 

How  when  the  tribe  heard  that  their  chief  lady  was  dead 
their  sorrow  was  very  great ; they  said  Hutu  must  be  the 
payment ; Hutu  heard  this,  and  went  to  the  Pa,  and  said  to 
her  tribe,  it  is  good,  I will  be  the  atonement  for  her  death, 
but  he  told,  them  not  to  be  in  a hurry  to  bury  the  body  of 
Pare  before  he  returned,  the  tribe  agreed,  and  he  set  off, 
when  he  reached  the  place  of  departed  spirits,  he  saw 
Hine  nui  te  po,  and  enquired  which  was  the  way  down  ? 
She  pointed  out  to  him  the  road  taken  by  the  spirits  of  dogs ; 
but  when  he  gave  his  beautiful  greenstone  jewel  to  her  then 
her  heart  was  opened,  and  she  showed  him  the  proper  road 
for  human  spirits  to  take ; this  was  the  common  practice  of 
Hine  nui  te  po  to  obtain  riches  ; she  then  cooked  food  for 
him,  beat  the  fern  root  and  put  it  into  a basket,  saying,  when 
you  reach  the  lower  regions  eat  sparingly  of  your  provisions 
that  they  may  last,  and  you  may  not  be  compelled  to  partake 
of  their  food,  for  if  you  do  you  cannot  return  upwards  again ; 
Hutu  agreed  to  do  as  desired.  She  again  said,  when  you 
jump  down  into  the  pitchy  darkness  bow  your  head,  you 
will  soon  reach  the  bottom,  for  the  wind  from  below  will 
blow  you  along,  then  lift  it  up,  and  your  feet  will  stand 
firm.  Hutu  carefully  followed  all  her  instructions,  when  he 
arrived  below,  he  lost  no  time,  but  immediately  began  his 
search  for  Pare,  he  inquired  after  her,  the  men  said  she 
was  in  the  pa. 

Pare  heard  that  Hutu  was  there,  but  she  would  not  go 
out ; then  Hutu  began  some  games,  throwing  the  stick  and 
catching  the  ball,  but  Pare  took  no  notice,  she  still  remained 
within  ; then  he  tried  the  morere,  a swing,  twisting  the 


272 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


rope  round  the  top  of  a very,  very  lofty  tree,  as  a swing ; 
he  pulled  the  rope,  so  that  the  head  of  the  tree  might  bend 
quite  down  to  the  ground,  the  top  touched  it,  and  Hutu  sat 
upon  it;  he  bid  a man  get  upon  his  shoulder,  calling  out 
let  go,  the  morere  bounded  up,  great  was  the  admiration  of 
the  men  at  the  wonderful  strength  and  skill  of  Hutu,  and  the 
variety  of  things  which  he  did ; at  last  the  spirit  of  Pare 
came  forth  to  see  what  was  being  done  ; Hutu  was  overjoyed 
at  seeing  her ; from  the  excess  of  her  delight  she  cried  out, 
let  me  get  on  your  shoulders;  he  gladly  allowed  her,  that 
being  just  what  he  desired ; he  said  to  Pare,  lay  hold  firmly 
of  my  neck,  she  said  to  him,  pull  down  the  morere  that  it 
may  quite  touch  the  ground,  when  it  was  thus  brought 
down  she  said,  let  go ; immediately  it  was  released  it 
bounded  up  with  immense  force,  the  stem  of  the  tree  stood 
upright,  and  the  rope  flew  quite  straight  up,  and  touched  the 
ground  above ; Hutu  at  once  laid  hold  of  the  grass,  which 
overhung  the  mouth  of  the  pit,  and  climbed  up  to  the  top, 
with  Pare  also,  who  clung  to  him.  Theyjboth  safely  reached 
the  world  above,  and  went  to  the  Kainga,  to  Parers  house, 
when  the  spirit  of  Pare  reached  her  body,  it  re-entered  it, 
she  was  quite  alive  and  well  again.  From  the  thankfulness 
of  the  tribe  for  her  restoration  to  life  they  strove  to  make 
Hutu  Pare’s  husband,  Hutu  answered,  but  what  shall  I do 
with  my  wife  and  children  ? They  replied— me  puna  rua,  take 
two  wives  ; he  consented,  and  they  called  Pare — Pare  Hutu. 

The  Story  of  Tama  te  Kapua,  and  his  brother 
Wakaturia. 

Truly  Houmaitawhiti,  their  father  was  the  beginner  of 
war,  he  was  the  author  of  much  strife,  even  at  Hawaiki,  and 
afterwards  in  Aotearoa.  His  dog  went  into  the  wahi  tapu, 
where  fragments  of  sacred  food  were  thrown,  and  devoured 
them,  this  sacrilegious  act  was  witnessed  both  by  Toi  and 
Uenuku,  who  killed  the  dog,  Pataka  tawhiti,  and  eat  him. 
In  vain  did  Tama  te  Kapua,  and  Wakaturia,  the  sons  of  Hou,* 

* They  constantly  shorten  the  names  of  persons  in  familiar  conversation. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


273 


seek  for  kim,  they  could  not  find  their  dog,  they  searched 
from  pa  to  pa,  until  at  last  they  reached  the  abode  of  Toi ; 
they  kept  crying,  “ moi  moi ” to  their  dog,  there  at  last  the 
dog  answered  them,  barking  inside  the  stomach  of  Toi, — 
hau,  hau,  Tama  and  Wakaturia  again  moi  moid,  and  the  dog 
repeated  the  bark, — hau,  hau.  Toi  firmly  closed  his  mouth, 
but  in  vain,  the  dog  still  kept  hau  hauing  from  within. 
Thence  arose  the  proverb  of  Toi : “ Slave,  thou  wert  con- 
cealed in  the  great  stomach  of  Toi,  and  yet  thou  dost  bark, 
thou  slave.” 

Tama  and  his  brother  returned  to  their  village,  they  con- 
sidered what  they  should  do  to  punish  Toi  and  Uenuku. 
They  left  their  garments  by  the  side  of  the  water  and  of  the 
Tuahu,  all  night,  all  day,  and  all  the  next  night,  the  blood 
of  the  Tuahu  dropped  upon  them,  an  aitua  or  omen  of  blood- 
shed ; they  immediately  began  to  make  stilts  for  Tama,  and 
when  they  were  finished  he  went  on  them,  and  his  brother 
on  foot;  they  arrived  in  the  night  at  Uenuku's  place,  where 
they  saw  the  Poroporo  full  of  fruit,  which  overshadowed  his 
house,  Tama  went  on  his  stilts  and  gathered  the  fruit,  they 
eat  it ; it  was  late  before  they  returned  home,  this  was  their 
practice,  night  after  night.  At  last  Uenuku  began  to  won- 
der what  had  become  of  the  fruit  of  his  Poroporo  tree,  who 
had  eaten  it,  he  carefully  examined  the  ground,  but  saw  no 
foot-prints,  there  were  only  the  marks  of  Tama's  stilts,  and 
he  could  not  tell  what  they  were ; when  night  came  he  set 
a watch,  and  waited  a long  time,  at  last  they  came,  the 
watchers  arose  and  rushed  upon  them,  Whakaturia  was 
caught,  but  Tama  escaped. 

They  carried  him  to  the  sea  side,  cried  out,  cut  him  in 
pieces  with  the  tomahawk,  and  throw  him  into  the  water, 
Whakaturia  said,  I cannot  be  killed  beside  the  water,  you 
must  carry  me  inland,  there  you  will  be  able  to  kill  me  ; 
they  agreed  to  his  words,  when  they  arrived  inland,  the 
whole  tribe,  the  thousand  of  Uenuku,  assembled  to  see 
Whakaturia  put  to  death,  they  ail  met  together,  some  said 
chop  him  to  pieces ; others  no,  let  us  bind  him  up  in  a 
mat,  and  suspend  him  from  the  roof  of  the  house,  for 

T 


274 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


the  smoke  to  suffocate  him,  to  this  they  all  assented ; then 
they  hoisted  him  up  to  the  ridge  pole  and  lighted  the 
fire ; they  began  to  haka,  when  they  were  tired  of  that 
they  sang  songs,  but  nothing  was  well  done,  all  was  very 
bad  ; thus  it  was,  night  after  night,  until  his  father  and 
brother  found  out  where  he  was ; Tama  heard  that  he  was 
suspended  from  the  roof  of  the  house  to  be  killed  by  the 
smoke,  therefore,  he  thought  he  would  go  and  see  what 
was  his  state,  whether  he  was  still  alive  in  the  smoke  ; 
he  went  in  the  night,  when  he  arrived  there,  he  climbed 
upon  the  roof  of  the  house,  and  broke  open  a small  place 
over  the  spot  where  he  was  suspended,  then  he  asked, 
are  you  dead  ? he  whispered  upwards,  no,  I am  alive ; is 
the  haka  of  this  tribe  good  ? enquired  his  brother,  what 
kind  of  haka  is  it  ? he  replied,  no,  it  is  very  bad,  they  are 
always  quarrelling  amongst  themselves  on  account  of  the 
badness  of  their  dancing  ; he  whispered  down  to  him, 
could  you  not  speak  to  them  below  ? O never  did  I hear 
people  haka  so  badly  as  the  people  of  this  tribe,  and  if  they 
answer  upwards  have  you  the  good  haka,  you  say  yes,  if  I 
were  to  haka  you  would  know  which  was  the  right  way,  if 
they  let  you  do  so,  then  say  I am  filthy  with  the  smoke,  let 
me  have  some  oil  and  a comb,  also  a feather  to  stick  in 
my  hair,  if  they  give  them,  then  say  I am  unfit  to  dance 
without  a garment,  give  me  the  red  pake  of  Uenuku,  as  a 
covering,  and  his  maipi,  then,  indeed,  when  I am  properly 
dressed  you  shall  see  the  right  way  to  haka,  and,  said 
Tama,  I will  be  outside  the  house,  and  when  you  rush  out  I 
will  fasten  the  door  and  stop  the  pursuers,  I will  close  the 
window  and  the  pilianga  as  well,  and  we  shall  both  easily 
escape,  thus  he  finished  his  talk  with  him. 

Wakaturia  said  to  Uenuku,  and  those  in  the  house,  listen 
all  of  you  who  are  hakaing  there — they  were  attentive  and 
cried  hush — be  quiet,  hear  what  the  fellow  who  is  suspended 
has  to  say,  we  thought  he  had  been  dead  before  this  with 
the  stifling  smoke,  but  no  ! he  is  still  alive ; all  agreed ; 
then  the  people  of  the  house  spoke  up  to  him,  thou  who  art 
suspended  above  speak  down ; truly  indeed,  what  a wretched 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


275 


kind  of  haka  is  that  of  yours  which  I have  heard ; the  tribe 
replied  upwards  to  him,  is  yours  skilled  in  the  haka  ? he 
answered  downwards,  it  greatly  excels  in  it;  and  do  you 
know  the  haka?  he  replied,  yes,  great  indeed  is  my  skill. 
Uenuku  said,  let  him  down,  and  accordingly  they  lowered 
him  ; the  tribe  said  haka  then  ; but  he  according  to  the 
instruction  which  Tama-te-Kapua  had  given,  did  exactly 
what  was  told  him,  first  the  brave  man  said,  brighten  up  the 
flame  of  the  fire,  lest  it  should  smoke ; it  was  done,  they  said 
haka  now,  he  replied,  I am  filthy  with  the  smoke,  give  me 
some  oil,  a comb,  and  a feather  to  stick  in  my  hair,  and  a 
garment,  then  I shall  be  fit  to  begin.  He  arranged  his  hair 
properly,  he  took  the  red  garment  of  Uenuku  with  his  maipi, 
then  began  to  haka ; wonderful  was  the  agility  with  which 
he  twirled  himself  round  ! the  wind  blowing  about  his 
feather,  he  twisted  his  belt  and  karakiad,  he  laid  hold  of  the 
maipi  and  karakiad,  then  he  danced  upwards  and  karakiad ; 
the  haka  he  performed  was  surprising,  he  went  first  on  one 
side  then  on  the  other,  quite  to  the  door,  then  to  the  end  of 
the  house  to  the  tungaroa ; there  he  stood,  and  that  brave 
man  said,  draw  aside  the  door  that  I may  breathe,  for  I am 
very  hot ; they  slid  the  door  aside,  he  stood  up,  he  bounded 
from  side  to  side  fco  the  front  of  the  house,  going  from  side 
to  side  in  his  returning  inside,  the  people  wondered  at  his 
agility ; now  he  twirled  about  like  the  wind,  twice  he  went 
up  and  twice  he  returned,  twice  he  went  inside  and  twice 
outside,  he  stood  entirely  outside  ; there  sat  Tama  with  the 
sticks  in  his  hands  to  fasten  the  door,  Wakaturia  returned 
inside,  he  danced  again,  first  on  one  side  then  on  the  other, 
waving  about  the  maipi,  then  he  went  to  the  extreme  end  of 
the  house,  then  he  returned  to  the  door,  and  bounded  out ; 
Tama  immediately  closed  the  door,  and  fastened  it  as  well 
as  the  window  and  pihanga ; truly,  they  heard  the  cursing 
of  the  people  within,  where  they  were  as  in  a hole,  of  the 
kakariki,  paroquet,  in  a hollow  tree. 

Tama  and  his  brother  escaped,  the  captives  had  to  get  a 
person  from  without  to  undo  the  door  and  let  them  out,  the 
thousand  confined  within. 

t 2 


276 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


Manaia. 

At  Whangarei  there  are  some  very  remarkable  looking 
rocks,  which  strike  the  eye  of  all  who  sail  past  them.  The 
natives  have  a curious  tradition  respecting  them. 

Formerly  a very  powerful  priest,  named  Manaia,  lived 
there,  his  wife,  Maunga-kie-kie,  was  also  a priestess ; they 
had  two  daughters,  and  a slave  named  Paeko.  Manaia  had 
a quarrel  with  the  chief  of  some  neighbouring  isle;  he 
thought  the  best  way  of  conquering  him  would  be  to  erect  a 
pier  from  the  main  land  to  the  island ; he,  therefore,  dili- 
gently set  to  work  to  make  one,  and  so  hard  did  he  work  at 
it  that  it  seemed  probable  it  would  soon  be  completed. 
Now,  his  daughter,  his  chief  favorite,  was  in  love  with 
the  son  of  his  enemy,  she  justly  began  to  fear  for  his  life, 
and  therefore  sent  to  her  father,  threatening  that  if  he 
proceeded  any  further  with  his  work,  she  would  throw  her- 
self into  the  sea  from  his  pier  and  drown  herself ; justly 
alarmed  at  this  threat,  Manaia  desisted  from  proceeding 
with  the  work  ; the  rocks  there  jut  out  far  into  the  sea, 
and  present  quite  the  appearance  of  a pier.  Another  tradi- 
tion states,  that  it  was  made  by  Manaia's  daughter  for  the 
convenience  of  fishing,  but  it  certainly  appears  to  have  been 
far  too  heavy  and  laborious  a work  for  a young  lady,  and  so 
thought  her  fathePs  gods,  who  every  night  replaced  all  the 
stones  she  had  brought  during  the  day,  and  returned  them 
to  their  original  position;  this  opposition  being  continued 
night  after  night,  she  at  last  gave  it  up  as  being  quite 
hopeless.  The  entire  family  then  determined  on  going  from 
Wan  gar  ei  to  the  Bay  of  Islands,  taking  their  slave  Paeko 
with  them,  who  carried  a calabash  in  each  hand  and  was 
followed  by  their  dog ; before  they  began  their  journey  Manaia 
quarrelled  with  his  wife,  and  all  were  in  a very  bad  temper 
with  each  other,  they  crossed  over  the  Wangarei  river  and 
ascended  the  rugged  ridge  of  the  mountain  on  the  other 
side,  where  they  sat  down  to  rest ; there  again  they  re- 
newed the  quarrel,  the  chief  kicked  his  wife,  the  slave 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


277 


interceded  for  her,  got  kicked  also  for  his  pains,  and  was 
sent  flying  down  the  hill  with  the  calabashes  in  his  hands ; 
even  the  dog  shared  its  masters  wrath,  and  was  kicked  as 
well  as  the  others ; to  punish  Manaia,  the  gods,  who  were 
looking  on,  turned  the  whole  party  into  stone,  and  there  they 
are  still  to  be  seen  on  the  rugged  ridge,  a warning  to  all  as 
well  as  chiefs,  to  avoid  domestic  brawls,  which  are  sure  to 
have  an  unfortunate  and  unsatisfactory  termination. 


Uenuku. 

This  is  a talk  about  Uenuku,  he  was  from  Horana,  he  lived 
with  his  wife,  who  bore  him  Kahutia  te  rangi,  he  had  a great 
number  of  sons,  and  obtained  kura  for  them  all : they  then 
went  on  a journey  taking  it  with  them,  having  lost  it  they 
turned  back  and  sought  for  it  in  vain,  but  not  finding  it,  they 
all  returned  home  very  sorrowful,  they  came  to  Uenuku,  and 
told  him,  he  also  was  much  grieved  for  the  loss ; after  they 
had  returned  it  was  found,  but  when  Uenuku  sent  for  it,  the 
finders  would  not  give  it  up,  saying,  according  to  the  proverb 
of  Mahina,  what  had  drifted  ashore  was  not  to  be  restored. 
The  kura  was  kept  by  the  finders,  messengers  were  sent  to 
fetch  it,  they  were  taken  and  killed,  these  murders  were 
committed  by  Wena ; he  slew  Mapu  te  rangi,  who  was 
killed,  as  well  as  the  children  of  Uenuku  ; one  escaped, 
reached  his  father  and  told  him  that  they  two  only  were 
left,  great  was  the  anger  of  Uenuku,  he  made  wooden 
images  of  men  for  his  canoes,  for  all  his  people  were  killed 
by  Wena,  he  embarked  and  placed  the  figures  he  had  made 
in  them,  then  went  to  fight,  and  proceeded  to  Wena's  place  : 
he  saw  him  making  for  the  shore,  but  he  followed  him  from 
the  sea ; one  paddled  away,  the  other  paddled  after  him, 
they  approached  one  another,  they  fought,  Wena  and  all  his 
people  were  killed  ; this  was  the  battle  of  the  logs.  One  man 
drifted  on  shore,  his  name  was  Paripari ; Manurautaka  was 
taken  captive  alive  and  eaten  by  Uenuku  sitting  on  his  mat, 
made  of  the  scalps  he  had  taken,  which  was  named  Rua- 
tapu. 


278 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


The  Origin  of  the  Owl. 

The  wife  and  daughter  of  the  bird  of  day,  Te  Manu  i te 
ra,  went  one  day  to  the  beach  to  get  pipis,  cockles ; whilst 
the  mother  was  thus  employed,  the  daughter  was  looking 
about  here  and  there,  and  espied  a ladder  which  reached 
upwards  far  away  out  of  sight,  she  began  to  climb  up  it, 
when  she  had  ascended  some  distance  her  mother  saw 
her,  and  cried  out,  Oh  my  daughter,  come  down,  come 
down,  but  she  paid  no  attention,  still  continued  going  up 
higher  and  higher,  until  at  last  she  came  to  the  top,  and 
behold  there  was  a village,  she  did  not  stop  there,  but 
still  went  on  ; the  people  of  the  place  saw  her,  and  called 
out,  as  you  go  by  RupeWs  dwelling,  do  not  laugh  if  you 
see  him  and  his  wife  Rupetakoto,  or  they  will  kill  you ; she 
made  no  reply,  but  walked  on,  and  at  last  came  to  RupeWs 
house,  she  looked  at  them  and  laughed,  for  she  could  not 
help  doing  so,  they  were  such  odd-looking  people ; this 
made  them  very  angry,  they  ran  out  after  her,  caught  her, 
and  shut  her  up  in  a house. 

Night  came  and  Te  Manu  o te  ra’s  daughter  did  not 
return  home,  so  her  brothers  set  off  to  seek  her,  they 
ascended  the  ladder,  reached  the  village,  and  enquired  of 
the  inhabitants  if  they  had  seen  their  sister,  they  replied 
that  they  had,  and  that  she  had  gone  on  to  RupeWs  place ; 
when  they  arrived  there  they  enquired  for  her,  but  received 
no  answer,  and  would  not  have  discovered  her  had  they  not 
heard  her  singing  in  her  prison,  so  they  broke  open  the  door 
and  rescued  their  sister,  being  very  angry  they  went  to 
RupeWs  place  killed  his  wife,  and  him  they  turned  into  an 
owl.  When  you  hear  that  bird  of  darkness  calling  out  in 
the  night,  it  is  Rupetu  calling  for  Rupetakoto,  always  call- 
ing, but  never  finding. 


The  Story  of  the  Karitehe. 

The  Karawa  have  a tradition  that  formerly  two  caves 
called  the  Kauhoehoe,  near  Knuckle  Point,  Lawriston 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


279 


Bay,  were  inhabited  by  a race  of  fairies  who  were  called 
the  Karitehe;  the)'-  are  described  as  being  a little  yellow- 
haired people,  with  a white  skin  like  Europeans,  these 
fairies  used  to  come  and  fish  in  the  bay  near  the  caves  ; an 
ancestor  of  Nopera  Pana  Kareao  on  one  occasion  surprised 
them  whilst  thus  employed,  unperceived  he  got  amongst 
them,  for  he  was  very  fair,  and  likewise  small  in  stature, 
as  soon  as  they  had  enclosed  a great  number  of  fish  in 
their  seine  the  kokiri,  he  lifted  up  one  corner  of  it  and 
allowed  them  all  to  escape,  the  fairies  exclaimed,  there  is 
the  smell  of  man,  and  immediately  both  fairies  and  net 
vanished  away.  On  another  occasion  he  again  mixed 
amongst  them,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  one  of  them,  a 
young  girl,  who  became  his  wife,  and  from  her  Nopera 
Panakareao,  the  late  chief  of  the  Rarawa,  was  descended ; 
after  this  fairy  was  captured,  the  Karitehe  abandoned  the 
Kauhoehoe,  and  never  returned.  The  Rarawa  state,  that 
formerly  the  Karitehe  used  to  haunt  the  forests  of  the  north 
until  white  people  came,  and  frequently  surprised  young 
girls  who  went  into  the  woods  to  gather  tawhara,  the  fruit  of 
the  kiekie ; those  girls  who  were  thus  seized  never  returned 
again  to  their  homes. 

The  Story  of  the  Where,  or  Monster  Cuttle  Fish 
of  Raukaua  (Cook's  Straits.) 

The  many  tales  of  canoes  pulled  under  water  by  this 
monster  cuttle  fish  having  reached  Wanganui,  two  of  its 
chiefs  were  seized  with  a desire  to  go  and  destroy  it.  Popea 
and  Tamangakau  having  heard  the  tales  of  the  great  cuttle 
fish,  whose  abode  was  Ko  nga  watu  kai  ponu,  which  is  near 
Titapua  maunga,  and  close  to  Nga  tata  o te  waka  o Kupe, 
went  and  adzed  out  a canoe  in  the  forest  near  the  stream 
Maruia,  near  Waipakura  ; when  the  canoe  was  finished 
they  hauled  it  out,  and  reached  the  cliff  at  Kaimatira,  near 
Waipakura,  and  there  shot  it  down  from  the  top  of  the 
precipice,  to  test  its  strength,  that  they  might  have  a token 
of  its  suitability  for  the  work  ; it  was  not  broken,  it  dived 


280 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


down  from  one  side  of  tlie  Wanganui  to  the  other,  then  a 
loud  umere , shout  of  joy,  was  raised  for  the  good  omen  of 
that  canoe,  for  if  it  had  cracked  it  would  not  have  answered ; 
this  being  done  it  was  dragged  on  shore,  and  the  side  boards 
put  on ; when  this  and  the  other  canoe  were  finished  they 
went  to  slay  Turere  ao,  as  in  payment  for  the  death  of 
Aukehu,  they  killed  him,  took  his  head  and  stuck  it  on 
the  post  of  the  Pae  pae  at  Manga  watu,  this  was  the  food  for 
the  voyage  of  Pohea  and  Tamangakau  (ko  te  o tenei)  * when 
they  went  to  slay  the  cuttle  fish ; on  arriving  at  the  lips  of 
the  Wanganui,  they  sent  for  Tireo  o te  Rangi,  a very  sacred 
person,  (hei  po  ike  mo  te  waka),  to  sit  at  the  bow  of  the 
canoe  and  render  it  sacred  : he  was  brought  from  Tura- 
kina,  from  the  top  of  Tauranga  manga,  and  taken  on 
board  to  make  the  canoe  very  sacred,  they  then  sailed  and 
arrived  at  Rangitikei.  One  hundred  men  of  the  party,  hehe} 
went  on  shore,  the  men  of  Rangitikei  saw  them  and  came  to 
kill  them,  they  seized  their  paddles  and  fought  with  them, 
and  killed  the  men  of  Rangitikei,  thence  Tawiri  hoe  became 
the  name  of  the  battle.  Now  when  this  battle  was  finished 
by  Pohea  and  Tamangakau,  they  went  thence  to  the  other 
side  of  the  Mana  watu,  the  men  of  that  place  stood  up  to 
fight,  that  battle  over,  they  left  as  a name  for  the  place 
Harakeke  tau  toro,  from  the  flax  leaves  with  which  their 
top-knots  and  loins  were  tied,  afterwards  they  went  and 
reached  the  Ika  a maru  and  slept  there;  in  the  morning 
they  sailed  for  Ara  pawa ; when  they  reached  the  middle 
of  Raukawa  ko  nga  watu  kai  ponu,f  the  abode  of  the  Weke, 
the  water  was  of  a different  color,  rereke,  it  was  red,  before 
long  the  Weke  appeared  and  laid  hold  of  the  canoe  with  his 
feelers,  the  men  cried  out,  alas  ! and  were  afraid ; they 
had  made  pointed  poles  to  spear  the  fish  : the  men  cried 
out,  let  us  hasten  to  kill  the  Weke,  but  Pohea  said,  wait 
till  we  see  his  body,  then  he  emptied  the  taha,  calabash  of 

* O means  food  for  a journey,  this  seems  to  be  a play  upon  the  name  of  the 
person  they  killed,  Turere  a o. 

f Titapua  maunga  and  Nga  tata  o te  waka  o Kupe,  were  close  to  the  abode 
of  the  Weke.  _ 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


281 


oil,  on  the  water,  that  it  might  be  clear,  for  it  was  dark 
and  agitated ; now  behold  the  body  of  the  cuttle  fish  was 
distinctly  seen,  they  immediately  speared  him  and  pierced  his 
stomach,  this  was  all,  it  was  killed ; the  body  being  left,  it 
drifted  on  shore,  and  the  spot  obtained  the  name  of  Wheke- 
nni  to  this  day.  Pohea  and  Tamangakau  reached  Arapawa, 
this  place  belonged  to  Turere  te  ao,  to  which  they  came. 
Kahu  pani,  his  sister,  lived  there,  she  enquired,  was  there 
not  a name  at  Wanganui,  Ture  ao  ? they  said,  no  : she  said, 
her  brother  was  so  called,  being  put  off  their  guard,  they 
said,  there  is  only  one  name  Turere  te  ao ; the  woman 
wept,  her  tribe  having  enquired  the  reason,  slew  Pohea  and 
Tamangakau,  because  they  had  slain  her  brother.  She  pre- 
tended her  brother's  name  was  different,  to  get  them  to  say 
the  true  one,  by  which  to  find  them  out.  Behold  the  stump 
from  which  the  canoe  was  taken  is  still  to  be  seen,  formerly 
they  could  not  see  it,  because  it  was  sacred  and  guarded 
by  the  rainbow. 

Tradition  of  the  Origin  op  Sand  on  the  Taranaki 
Coast. 

? 

Formerly  the  Taranaki  shores  were  entirely  covered  with  huge 
boulcjers,  as  indeed  is  still  the  case  with  a great  portion  of 
them,  which  renders  travelling  along  them  very  difficult  and 
unpleasant.  Once  upon  a time  two  strange  canoes  arrived  on 
the  coast,  one  contained  the  two  daughters  of  a god,  the  other 
was  filled  with  their  slaves ; they  were  going  to  visit  some  other 
island  when  they  were  driven  out  of  their  course  by  the  current. 
On  their  arrival  at  Taranaki  they  were  very  well  received, 
and  treated  with  the  respect  befitting  their  high  rank  ; at 
last  they  left,  and  on  reaching  their  home,  the  god  was  so 
much  pleased  with  the  attention  which  had  been  paid  to 
them,  that  he  enquired  what  he  could  do  to  requite  their 
kind  hosts  ; his  daughters  said  the  Taranaki  country  was 
a very  good  one,  being  extremely  fertile  and  productive, 
so  that  they  had  abundance  of  food,  and  of  the  best  kind, 
there  was  only  one  thing  they  could  find  fault  with,  and 


282 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


that  was  their  coast,  it  was  covered  with  great  stones,  which 
hurt  the  feet,  they  had  no  sand ; Oh,  said  the  Atua,  I will 
will  soon  remedy  that  evil  for  them,  he  immediately  sent 
a canoe  filled  with  sand,  which  he  caused  to  be  spread  over 
all  the  stones,  and  left  sufficient  to  form  sand  hills  as  well, 
so  that  should  the  sea  wash  any  away  there  might  be  sufficient 
to  replace  it.  Another  account  states  that  some  old  priest 
in  walking  over  the  stones  hurt  his  feet,  and  then  in  anger 
uttered  a spell,  which  caused  the  sand  immediately  to  be 
blown  up  and  cover  the  coast.  Some  of  the  natives  also  ac- 
count for  the  coming  of  Mount  Taranaki  to  its  present  place  in 
the  following  way.  Taranaki  was  the  wife  of  Tongariro,  an 
active  volcano,  but  he  behaved  so  ill  to  her,  that  she  at  last 
determined  to  run  away  from  him  ; so  one  morning  very  early, 
she  set  off.  Tongariro  soon  missed  his  partner,  and  went  in 
pursuit  of  her,  being,  however,  heavy  and  bulky,  he  could  not 
follow  very  fast,  as  she  was  far  lighter  and  more  nimble ; at 
last  he  got  into  a great  swamp  and  stuck  fast  in  it,  unable 
to  catch  his  wife,  in  great  anger  he  spit  fire  at  her,  which 
accounts  for  fire  being  emitted  from  Tongariro  ; his  wife 
pursued  her  journey  and  to  be  as  far  as  possible  from  her 
old  companion,  placed  herself  on  the  sea  coast  in  her  present 
position,  where  she  has  ever  since  remained. 

& 

Rupe. 

This  is  the  story  of  Rupe,  a god  in  the  form  of  a pigeon, 
of  his  sisters  Hina  te  iwa  iwa,  Hina  te  otaota,  Iti  iti  mareka- 
reka,  Raukatauri,  and  Raukatamea.  Behold  Rupe  arrived 
from  heaven  to  search  for  his  sister  Hina  te  otaota,  he  was 
seen  by  her  at  Motutapu,  Rupe  came  to  the  window  of  the 
house  and  cried  over  his  sister ; this  was  his  lament,  down 
from  the  window  above  : — - 

0 Hina,  0 Hina, 

The  long  lost, 

Lost  in  Motutapu,  alas ! 

His  sister  cried  up  to  him  from  within  the  house — 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


283 


0 Rupe,  0 Rupe, 

My  brother,  alas  ! 

Their  mutual  lament  was  over,  they  dwelt  together  for  days 
or  for  months,  they  reached  Mangeremumu,  the  lazy  months, 
i.e .,  winter,  then  did  Rupe  return  to  his  home,  to  heaven ; 
he  reached  Tawatupapa,  where  he  was  overtaken  by  the 
cold,  being  the  Ngana  o tahuhu,  or  ridge  pole  of  heaven, 
where  it  was  intensely  cold ; at  Tawatupapa  Rupe  caused  his 
feathers  to  grow  upon  him,  and  they  grew,  he  straight- 
ened them  out,  and  they  became  straight,  he  caused  them 
to  be  full  grown,  and  they  were  full  grown ; the  new  bird 
was  fledged,  the  bird  of  Tane  was  full  plumed ; this  being 
finished  Rupe  flew  up  to  the  highest  heaven,  the  abode  of 
Rehua ; when  Rupe  was  hungry  the  God  Rehua  unbound  the 
girdle  of  his  hair  and  shook  his  locks,  when,  wonderful  to 
say,  a flock  of  small  birds  immediately  flew  forth,  upon  which 
Rupe  was  invited  to  feed,  but  that  he  declined  doing,  as 
everything  which  had  touched  the  head  of  the  god  was 
extremely  sacred ; the  mouth  of  Rupe  became  hoarse  through 
hunger,  thus  truly  the  pigeon  speaks  through  its  nose  and 
can  only  cry  ku-ku. 

Legend  oe  Flying  Men. 

The  abode  of  Te  manu  i te  ra,  the  bird  of  the  day,  was 
the  hill  Hikurangi.  The  evil  caused  by  the  moth  and  rust  had 
not  reached  his  house.  He  was  a god  and  his  house  was 
called  Totoka.  The  lightning  of  heaven  flashed  upon  it. 
This  was  the  proverb  about  him  : — 

Rere  rere  atewaiti,  Ka  rere  te  manu  i te  ra, 

Ma  rama  rama  ana  tatu  o te  rangi. 

Uenga  o te  rangi  possessed  the  power  of  flying,  so  did 
Tuwaka  and  Tamaroro.  Maru  also  could  fly,  and  likewise 
Rehua,  he  was  a good  man,  behold  his  dwelling  places  were 
called  Tupu  o te  rangi,  the  ancient  of  the  sky,  they  are 
like  the  hill  of  Hikurangi.  The  daughter  of  Rehua  Taki 
ao  te  rangi  lived  with  Tu  kai  taua,  behold  the  ears  of  Rehua 


284 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


were  deaf ; Ngo  ngo  blew  into  them  with  his  trumpet,  the 
trumpet  with  which  he  blew  was  called  Koringo  tangi  roa, 
long  blast,  the  ears  of  Rehua  were  cured,  he  could  again  hear 
men  speak,  when  he  found  he  was  healed,  he  gave  Taki  o te 
rangi  to  Ngo  ngo  to  wife  as  his  reward,  Maru  was  angry 
with  Rehua,  for  Tu  kai  taua,  her  former  husband,  was  Maru’s 
son,  he  sent  the  grub,  awato,  the  beetle,  moe  one , the  cater- 
pillar, hau  waha,  into  his  mar  a,  to  punish  him.  The  garden 
of  Rehua  was  called  Mo  ana  uru  uru ; all  the  food  of  Re- 
hua was  thus  destroyed,  then  for  the  first  time  did  they 
fight : behold  Maru  was  vanquished,  he  was  driven  away, 
he  fled  from  Rehua,  letting  fall  his  sleeping  mat,  the 
wakopa,  covering  of  heaven.  The  battles  of  Rehua  were 
Taruru,  Tao  oioi,  and  Witianga  te  ra.  Maru  fled  inside 
the  rock,  Toka  waiti ; the  proverb  for  Rehua  and  Maru 
is,  “ Ko  te  ika  o Taki  o te  rangi,  kai  taua  a Maru  raua 
ko  Rehua,  &c.”  The  quarrel  about  Taki  o te  rangi  caused 
Maru  and  Rehua  to  feed  upon  war ; the  fault  of  Ware  paia, 
the  offspring  of  Tawiti  nui  truly  fed  the  world  with  war. 
The  fault  of  Hine  nui  te  po  was  punished  in  the  bloody 
battle  at  Pikara  nui ; the  fault  of  Oranga  nui  was  punished 
in  the  battle  of  Kewa,  within  the  dark  cave,  Rua  ki  pouri, 
his  house.  From  Toka  witi,  shining  rock,  Maru  uttered  his 
spells. 

The  different  traditions  relating  to  the  grand  wars  which 
had  formerly  raged  amongst  them  alternately  speak  of  the 
chief  actors  as  gods  and  men,  doubtless,  they  were  all  deified 
heroes,  Rehua  being  represented  as  dwelling  in  the  highest 
heaven  must  have  been  one  of  their  greatest  in  ancient 
times. 

Tama  tuna,  an  Ancestor  of  the  Patu  toko  toko. 

Tradition  states  that  he  found  a fine  large  totara  tree  at 
the  bottom  of  a deep  hole  in  the  Wanganui,  at  a place  called 
Kohutu  near  Nga  Mahan ga,  every  day  he  dived  down, 
to  adze  out  a canoe  from  it ; this  he  kept  doing  until  it 
was  finished,  he  used  to  go  in  the  morning  and  stay  until 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


285 


evening,  he  knew  when  it  was  time  for  him  to  leave  off 
work,  by  the  eels  coming  and  coiling  about  his  legs;  his 
neighbours  knew  when  he  was  at  work,  by  the  chips  he 
made  rising  to  the  surface.  The  name  given  to  his  canoe 
was  Tahuri  te  arorangi.  This  man  was  an  ancestor  of  Turoa 
and  Ihaia. 


Eaukura. 

Near  the  Moa  awango  stream  which  flows  through  the 
central  plains  at  the  base  of  Patea,  there  is  a curious  little 
serpentine  lake,  long  and  narrow,  called  Pake  hiwi  which  is 
completely  shut  in  by  the  mountains.  A man  named  Eau- 
kura was  bewitched  and  walked  into  this  lake,  when  in, 
he  kept  going  from  one  end  to  the  other  and  round  the  sides, 
without  being  able  to  get  out  and  he  is  ever  doing  the  same, 
sometimes  his  head  appears  out  of  the  water,  and  my  informant 
stated  that  he  had  often  seen  him  thus  walking  up  and  down 
with  his  head  above  the  water. 


The  Child  of  Takaraho  who  was  stolen  by  the  Fairies. 

The  child  of  Takaraho  wandered  into  the  woods  at  the 
close  of  day.  The  fairy  of  the  forest,  te  Tahae  o te  Koraha, 
found  him  and  carried  him  off.  Takaraho's  husband  went 
in  search  of  the  child,  he  heard  him  cry,  and  followed  after 
but  could  not  lay  hold  of  him ; then  he  knew  in  his  heart 
that  the  child  was  turned  into  a spirit,  or  atua,  and  therefore 
returned  to  the  kainga.  The  child  cried,  all  the  men  in 
the  place  heard  ifc,  they  recognized  the  voice  which  was  cry- 
ing, tried  to  find  and  lay  hold  of  the  child,  but  in  vain, 
they  could  not  do  so,  for  whilst  they  were  following  the 
voice  in  one  place,  suddenly  a different  crying  was  heard  in 
a distant  spot  on  the  other  side  of  the  mountain,  therefore 
they  concluded  oh  ! it  is  an  atua,  hence  when  a noise  is 
heard  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  they  say  oh  ! it  is  the 
child  of  Takaraho  that  is  crying. 


286 


TRADITIONS  4ND  LEGENDS. 


Tradition  op  Taka. 

Taka  a chief  of  the  Nga  ti  an  is  said  to  have  been  one  of 
the  first,  who  went  to  settle  at  Muri  motu  beyond  Taupo, 
but  he  and  his  party  miserably  perished  from  cold  and  hunger 
on  the  Rangi  po  road*  which  runs  over  a spur  of  Tongariro ; 
he  was  going  to  Muri  motu,  to  spear  birds,  but  found  the 
snow  so  deep  that  he  was  detained  there  two  months,  their 
food  was  soon  consumed,  they  had  to  eat  their  seed  kumara, 
and  drank  hinu  kawa  mixed  with  clay,  afterwards  they  killed 
their  slaves,  next  their  children,  then  their  wives,  and  lastly 
one  another,  until  all  perished,  the  snow  being  so  deep 
that  it  was  level  with  the  tops  of  the  trees.  A hundred  and 
forty  are  said  to  have  thus  died  and  their  bones  to  remain 
to  this  day,  on  the  Rangi  po  road,  I never  saw  any  traces 
of  them  although  frequently  journeying  that  way,  I found 
it  however  covered  with  snow  in  winter,  and  was  myself 
detained  three  days  on  it  during  which  period  we  did  not 
advance  twenty  miles,  my  poor  natives  being  unable  to  walk 
without  shoes  on  the  frozen  snow,  without  leaving  a track 
of  blood,  I was  obliged  to  go  before  and  trample  a way  for 
them. 

Mahuru. 

Mahuru  was  an  Ancestor  of  Hawaiki.  He  sent  the 
Wawauroa,  cuckoo,  as  his  messenger  to  New  Zealand,  to 
tell  them  when  to  dig  their  cultivations,  and  prepare  his 
kumara  ground,  but  that  bird,  came  too  early  in  the  year, 
and  the  kumara  were  all  killed  by  the  frost.  Mahuru 
literally  means  a shoot  or  sprout  and  may  be  a figurative 
term  for  spring,  Maka  and  Paiake  were  two  other  ancestors 
of  Hawaiki  who  sent  the  Kawe  kawea,  another  cuckoo,  and 
the  Riro  riro,  as  the  harbingers  of  summer  ; when  they 
arrive,  planting  begins  in  earnest,  there  is  then  no  further 

* Rangi  po  is  the  name  of  a road  through  the  interior,  all  the  native  roads 
have  names. 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


287 


fear  of  frost ; Maka  signifies  to  cast  into  the  ground,  as  the 
seed  kumara ; Paiake  means  a root,  these  also  may  be  figura- 
tive of  summer.  When  the  Kawe  kawea  first  arrives  its  cry 
is  Kui  kui  “ it's  cold,  it’s  cold,”  but  afterwards  as  the  season 
advances  it  changes  its  note  to  Witi  ora,  witi  ora,  “ it's  warm, 
it’s  warm.” 

MATUA  KOBE WITHOUT  FATHER. 

Matua  kore  was  the  name  of  a celebrated  taiaha,  a spear 
which  was  supposed  to  possess  peculiar  virtue  and  super- 
natural powers.  It  was  owned  by  the  Nga-ti-mania-poto, 
but  originally  belonged  to  Hore,  a chief  who  gained  three 
battles  with  it  over  the  Ngatiawa.  Te  Tauri  the  chief  of 
Ngatituwharetoa  asked  for  this  taiaha  and  it  was  given  up  to 
him,  he  used  to  keep  it  constantly  enveloped  in  its  covering 
except  when  he  heard  of  the  approach  of  an  enemy  at  which 
times  he  consulted  it  as  an  oracle,  for  the  purpose  of 
ascertaining  what  success  he  should  have  if  he  met  the 
enemy,  he  decided  by  the  appearance  of  the  red  feathers 
with  which  the  head  of  the  taiaha  was  ornamented,  if  on 
removing  its  envelope  they  appeared  a bright  flaming  red, 
the  omen  was  considered  favorable ; if  on  the  contrary  a 
dull  or  dusky  red  it  was  a bad  omen  and  foreboded  defeat 
to  its  owner. 

Te  Tauri  gained  two  victories  with  Matua  kore,  at  the  end 
of  the  second  battle  it  was  lost,  Ko  Pataua  the  first  battle, 
Ko  Kurawi  the  second.  The  Ngatiraukawa  were  their  foes, 
they  were  beaten,  and  had  nearly  all  retreated  ; Te  Tauri 
had  knocked  down  two  men  with  one  stroke  of  Matua  kore, 
their  names  were  Matua  and  Tangata,  whilst  Te  Tauri  was 
busy  despatching  Matua  with  his  mere  pounamu,  Tangata 
got  up  and  seizing  the  taiaha  made  off  with  it : being 
evening,  Te  Tauri  was  unable  to  recover  his  treasure  and  the 
tribe  into  whose  possession  Matua  kore  fell,  were  afraid  to 
keep  such  a celebrated  weapon  openly,  it  was  therefore 
disfigured;  they  adzed  off  the  carving  of  the  tongue  and 
concealed  the  weapon  in  the  earth,  thus  it  was  lost. 


288 


TRADITIONS  AND  LEGENDS. 


The  Feather  op  the  Moa. 

This  is  the  story  of  Taukaituroa,  and  his  dog  Ngaupari ; 
he  was  a man  of  Murimotu,  an  ancestor  of  the  inhabitants 
of  that  part.  One  of  his  exploits  was  going  to  fight  at 
Rotorua,  and  burning  the  house  in  which  all  his  enemies 
were  assembled,  and  thus  destroying  them ; afterwards  he 
returned  to  Muri  motu,  and  went  to  Ngati  ka  hunu  to 
carry  a plume  of  the  Moa,  he  received  a celebrated  green- 
stone mere  in  payment  for  the  much-prized  feather.  When 
he  returned  to  Murimotu  he  died  and  was  buried ; it  was 
at  Ko  kopo  he  was  interred,  together  with  his  green-stone  ; 
the  fear  of  the  men  who  wished  to  steal  the  Mere  was  lest 
the  great  reptile  which  guarded  it  should  kill  them,  it  was 
also  a very  sacred  place,  and  moreover,  quite  covered  with 
dreadful  nettles,  so  that  no  man  can  safely  go  near  the  place. 
The  true  reason  however  appears  to  be  that  no  one  knows 
where  he  was  buried. 


Lake  Mapere. 

At  the  foot  of  Pukenui  a volcanic  hill,  about  three  miles 
distant  from  Waimate,  Bay  of  Islands,  there  is  a very  fine 
lake,  from  five  to  seven  miles  long,  and  two  or  three  broad, 
at  an  elevation  of  more  than  seven  hundred  feet  above 
the  sea ; it  is  called  by  the  natives  Mapere,  there  is  a 
curious  tradition  relative  to  its  formation,  that  once  it 
was  a plain,  containing  five  villages,  in  one  of  these  situ- 
ated near  a wood  lived  a chief  who,  wanting  some  water, 
when  his  wives  and  slaves  were  from  home,  and  being 
ashamed  to  let  his  neighbours  see  him  draw  it  at  the  public 
fountain,  went  and  began  to  dig  a well  in  a retired  spot ; 
but  no  sooner  had  he  dug  down  a little  way,  than  flames  burst 
forth  from  it,  which  rapidly  spread,  and  consumed  the  trees 
and  village,  large  stones  also  were  shot  out,  but  after  a time, 
the  fire  was  exhausted,  and  water  gushed  up,  which  formed 
the  present  lake ; the  survivors  preserved  the  names  of  the 


ORIGINAL  CANOES. 


289 


places  and  families  by  calling  tbe  headlands  after  them  ; two 
old  chiefs  still  living  at  Mawe,  a village  on  its  banks,  declare 
that  when  they  were  boys,  watching  with  their  tribe,  by  the 
side  of  the  lake,  for  fear  of  their  enemies,  in  bravado  they 
ran  np  the  hill  Putaia,  a very  sacred  spot  which  has  several 
remarkable  fissures  in  it,  down  one  of  them  they  threw 
some  stones,  afraid  of  what  they  had  done,  they  ran  away, 
when  a tremendous  rumbling  took  place,  and  the  earth  shook 
under  them  until  they  were  so  frightened  that  their  teeth 
chattered ; after  some  time,  they  saw  an  island  suddenly  rise 
up  in  the  middle  of  the  lake,  which  extended  nearly  across 
it  • it  remained  the  whole  of  that  day,  and  then  gradually 
subsided,  leaving  a shoal  in  its  place,  which  is  still  to  be 
seen,  the  deepest  water  being  near  the  shores.* 

Original  Canoes. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  Canoes  which  are  said  to 
have  brought  the  first  settlers  to  the  island  : — 

1.  Mataorua. — The  chief  was  Kupe ; it  came  to  Wanganui 
a te  ra,  Port  Nicholson.  Kupe  went  back  to  Ilawaiki.  The 
Nga  te  rua  nui  came  in  it. 

2.  Aotea. — Turi  was  its  chief ; it  brought  the  karaJca, 
which  was  first  planted  at  Aotea,  the  kakaua,  kumara,  and 
joara  tawitij  yam  ; this  name  is  now  given  to  an  edible 
fern,  the  former  being  lost ; the  pukeko,  kakariki,  and  all 
plundering  birds,  with  the  kiore,  rat,  came  in  it,  also  the 
Nga-ti-rua-nui,  Nga  rauru,  Wanganui,  and  Ngatimaru.  This 
canoe  is  likewise  called  Aotea  roa. 

* This  tradition  is  probably  founded  on  fact.  That  the  site  of  the  present 
lake  was  a wood,  is  evident  from  the  number  of  trees  which  are  still  standing 
in  the  water.  When  Captains  Ross  and  Crozier  came  to  Waimate,  they  cast 
the  seine  into  the  lake  at  some  distance  from  the  shore,  but  it  was  so  entangled 
amongst  the  stumps  at  the  bottom  as  to  be  almost  tom  to  pieces,  bringing  up 
large  branches  of  trees  with  it  ; the  greatest  depth  of  the  lake  was  found  to  be 
five  fathoms,  from  it  flows  a river  over  a ledge  of  rock,  to  the  west,  and  falls 
into  the  Hokianga,  this  ledge  is  doubtless  a stream  of  lava,  which,  crossing 
the  lowest  part  of  the  plain,  stopped  its  drainage,  and  thus  formed  the  present 
lake,  which,  with  very  little  expense,  might  be  restored  to  what  it  must  once 
have  been — one  of  the  most  fertile  plains  in  that  part  of  the  island. 

U 


290 


ORIGINAL  CANOES. 


3.  Tainui  A — Hoturoa  was  the  chief,  the  Waikato,  Nga  ti 
Raukawa,  Nga  Puhi,  Nga  ti  Awa  came  in  it,  it  also  brought 
the  anurangi , a kind  of  kumara. 

4.  Arawa.- — Nga  Toro  i rangi  was  its  Ariki,  and  Tama  te 
Kapua  its  chief.  The  ancestors  of  the  Nga  ti  wakaue,  and 
the  Nga  ti  Porou  were  in  it ; this  was  a double  canoe. 
Houmaitawiti,  Toi,  Maka,  Hei,  Ihenga,  Tauninihi  Rongo- 
kaka,  also  came  in  the  Arawa. 

5.  Kuru  haupo. — Ruatea  was  its  chief ; Nga  ti  Apa,  Tara- 
naki, Nga  ti  rua  nui,  Nga  ti  Kahungunu  were  in  it. 

6.  Orouta. — Uengapuanaki  was  the  chief;  Nga  ti  rua  nui 
came  in  it. 

7.  Taki  tumu. — Tamatea-hua  tahi-nuku  roa,  was  the  chief ; 
Nga  ti  rua  nui,  Tata,  Tau  tui,  and  Mara  came  in  it. 

8.  Matatua. — Rua  auru  was  the  chief ; Nga  ti  rua  nui, 
Nga  ti  Kahungunu.  The  taro  was  brought  in  this  canoe. 
The  Matatua  landed  at  Wakatane. 

9.  Pang  atom  (according  to  another  account  this  canoe  is 
called  Papakatoru) . — Its  chief  was  Rakewananga  ora ; Nga 
ti  rua  nui,  Nga  Rauru,  came  in  it.  Some  traditions  state 
that  this  canoe  did  not  land  its  men,  as  the  natives  opposed 
their  doing  so. 

10.  Tokomaru  (this  canoe  is  also  called  Tongamaru). — 
Rakeora  was  the  chief ; Nga  ti  rua  nui,  Nga  ti  tama,  Nga  ti 
mutunga,  Nga  ti  awa  tribe,  came  by  it ; by  some  Manaia  is 
said  to  have  been  its  chief. 

11 . Motumotu  ahi. — Puatautahi  was  the  chief ; Nga  Rauru, 
Nga  ti  rua  nui,  were  in  it. 

12. - — Te  Rangi  ua  mutu. — Tamatea  rokai  was  the  chief; 
Nga  ti  rua  nui.  It  came  to  Ranga  tapu.f  This  canoe  is 
also  called  Tairea. 

* The  Tainui  and  Arawa  both  made  land  at  Wangaparaoa,  near  Auckland. 
The  Tainui  arrived  first,  and  finding  a sperm  whale  stranded  there,  some  of 
the  crew  stuck  a pole  in  it  to  take-  possession,  hence  the  haven  was  named 
Wangaparaoa,  whale  harbour. 

f On  their  arrival  at  that  place,  they  saw  stones  like  English  flints,  and  moa 
bones.  It  was  there  I also  discovered  a large  quantity  of  the  bones  of  the  din- 
ornis.  The  flints  were  the  stone  flakes  used  as  knives,  which  are  still  found 
there  by  the  side  of  the  ancient  ovens,  a proof  of  their  having  belonged  to  a 
more  ancient  race  than  the  Polynesian. 


ORIGINAL  CANOES. 


291 


13.  Waka  ringaringa. — Mawakeroa  the  chief ; Nga  ti  rua 
nui.  It  came  to  Kaupoko  nui,  Nga  te  ko. 

Toto  was  the  name  of  the  person  who  made  the  first  canoe ; 
Mata  o rua,  and  also  the  Aotea,  out  of  one  tree,  which  split 
in  two  parts  when  it  fell,  this  was  considered  a remarkable 
circumstance,  as  formerly,  having  no  iron  tools,  they  had 
both  to  burn  down  the  trees,  and  then  hollow  them  with  fire, 
and  thus  could  only  get  one  canoe  out  of  a tree,  however 
large  it  might  be. 

The  tuawhenua  or  main  land  was  united  to  Hawaiki  before 
Kupe  came,  he  cut  it  in  two,  and  made  the  sea  between. 
When  he  first  reached  this  tuawhenua,  he  found  a people 
there  called  Kahui  toka,  the  names  of  their  chiefs  were 
Kehu,  Rehu,  and  Monoa,  they  had  no  food  but  fern-root 
before  Kupe  found  them ; when  they  saw  his  canoe  come 
they  were  dreadfully  alarmed,  Turi,  on  his  arrival,  killed 
them.  Taki  tumu  and  Orouta  are  different  names  for  the 
same  canoe ; according  to  some,  Tutaranaki  was  the  maker 
of  Auraro  tuia  and  Tane  a rangi,  they  were  also  formed  of 
a split  tree,  the  former  was  Maufis  canoe.  These  two  appear 
to  be  distinct  ones,  the  accounts  from  different  parts  of  the 
island  vary  as  to  some  of  their  names  and  the  number.  Alto- 
gether I have  had  seventeen  thus  given,  but  not  by  the  same 
person.  The  Nga  puhi  speak  of  another  canoe,  Mamari,  in 
which  Nukutawiti  came  to  seek  for  Tupu  tupu  whenua,  who 
had  sailed  before,  this  name  however  appears  to  be  a figura- 
tive one,  relating  to  the  land  these  Maori  emigrants  were  in 
search  of. 

When  Kupe  went  back,  he  gave  such  a glowing  account 
of  the  size,  beauty,  and  productions  of  Aotea  toa  (for  so  he 
called  New  Zealand),  that  a fleet  of  six  canoes  was  immedi- 
ately raised  to  go  and  take  possession  of  it.  Kupe  is  fairly 
entitled  to  be  viewed  as  the  New  Zealand  Columbus.* 

In  another  account,  Taha  tuna,  Tairea,  Rima  rapu,  Totara 
keria,  are  also  mentioned.  With  all  these  little  discrepencies, 
when  the  majority  of  the  names  are  found  to  be  well  known 


* When  this  fleet  arrived,  they  named  the  north  island  Aotea  roa,  and  the 
great  Barrier  island  Aotea  iti. 


u 2 


292 


ORIGINAL  CANOES 


in  every  part,  with  the  chiefs  who  commanded  them,  as  well 
as  the  ancestors  of  the  different  tribes  who  came  in  them,  it 
is  a sure  proof  that  the  general  tradition  is  correct,  and  that 
the  natives  have  a more  accurate  account  of  the  founders  of 
their  race  than  either  the  English  or  Spanish  have  of  theirs 
in  America,  although  the  period  of  their  arrival  was  far  more 
remote  than  that  of  the  others,  and  labouring  under  the  dis- 
advantage of  not  possessing  a written  language  to  preserve 
its  memory,  when  they  can  thus  give  the  names  of  all  the 
canoes  which  brought  their  ancestors,  of  those  in  them,  and 
even  the  various  things  brought  with  them. 


A RATA  TREE  CLASPING  ANOTHER. 


NEW  ZEALAND  FERN  TREES  AND  FOREST  SCENERY. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


WAKATAUKI,  OR  PROVERBS. 


Next  to  traditions,  Proverbs  are  the  most  highly  esteemed  ; 
they  are  extremely  numerous,  and  used  on  all  occasions. 
The  following  are  a few  as  examples  : — 

1.  He  pai  kai ; e kore  e roa  te  tiro  hanga  ; ka  pa  tau,  he  pai  tan- 

gata  e roa  te  tiro  hanga. 

The  pleasure  derived  from  looking  at  good  food  is  short,  but 
that  of  looking  at  a good  man  is  long, 

2.  Maramara  nui  a mahi,  kei  riro  i a noho. 

Let  industry  be  rewarded,  lest  idleness  gets  the  advantage. 

8.  He  pai  tangata  ekore  e reia  ; he  kino  wahine  ka  reia. 

Let  a man  be  ever  so  good  looking,  be ' will  not  be  much 


294 


WAKATAUKt,  OR  PROVERBS. 


sought  after ; but  let  a woman  be  ever  so  plain,  men  will 
still  eagerly  seek  after  her  (literally  run  off  with). 

4.  Ko  Waitaba  nga  tangata,  ko  kawe  ke  te  ngakau. 

The  men  truly  are  Waitaha  in  name,  but  their  hearts  are  any- 
thing and  everything  (Waitaha  was  once  a tribe  celebrated 
for  number  and  courage). 

5.  He  kino  kai  e kore,  e rere  ki  te  pai  tangata,  he  pai  tangata  e 

rere,  ki  te  kino  kai. 

The  bad  quality  of  food  a man  eats  will  not  affect  his  good 
qualities,  or  lower  him ; but  his  good  qualities  will  raise  or 
sanctify  the  food. 

6.  Ka  ruku  ruku  a huna,  ka  horahora  a papaka  nui. 

He  who  has  a thick  garment  fears  not  the  rain  ; but  he  who 
has  only  a thin  one  flees  to  the  house  as  soon  as  it  begins. 

7.  Ka  waia  te  wahie  mo  takurua,  ka  mahia  te  kai  mo  tau. 

Fuel  is  only  sought  for  against  winter ; but  food  is  cultivated, 
for  the  whole  year. 

8.  Ma  pango,  ma  wero  ka  oti. 

When  gentlemen  and  slaves  unite,  the  work  will  soon  be  done. 
(This  refers  to  the  custom  of  chiefs  painting  themselves  with 
red  ochre  and  slaves  with  charcoal,  before  they  went  to  war.) 
This  appears  to  be  a reference  to  the  ancient  black  race. 

9.  Ka  hia  nga  kui  kui  i hoki  ki  toitoi. 

How  many  old  women  are  there  who  return  to  youth  ? — Toi 
toi  is  synonymous  with  the  English  word  toy,  expressive  of 
the  struggle  young  men  have  to  gain  their  wives. 

10.  He  kai  tangata  he  kai  titoki,  koke  mahia,  e tona  ringaringa, 

tino  kai  tino  makona. 

Whoever  trusts  to  another  man’s  labour  for  his  food,  will  be 
disappointed;  but  he  who  labours  with  his  own  hands, 
will  have  enough  and  to  spare.  (The  titoki  is  a tree  whose 
fruit  is  only  in  season  for  a short  time.) 

11.  Nau  i waka  aua  te  kakahu,  he  taniko  taku. 

You  wove  the  garment,  I put  a border  to  it.  (A  proverb  used 
when  a person  accuses  another  of  having  brought  any  evil 
upon  him,  of  which  in  reality  he  himself  was  the  cause.) 

12.  Tenei  ano  a mutu,  kei  roto  i tona  ware  pungawerewere. 

The  spider  is  not  seen  when  hid  in  his  web  ; so  the  real  inten- 
tion of  the  man  is  concealed  in  the  recess  of  his  heart. 

18.  He  ta  nga  kakaho  i kitea  e te  kanohi  o te  tangata. 


WAKATAUKI;  QR  PROVERBS. 


295 


The  slightest  movement  of  the  reed  waving  in  the  wind  is  per- 
ceived by  man’s  eye,  but  not  that  of  the  heart. 

14.  Ka  mate  koe  i te  paoa  ; kahore,  he  kauta. 

Yon  will  be  stifled  with  smoke  ; no  (said  ironically),  it  is  a 
cooking  shed,  which  makes  all  the  difference. 

15.  Ma  tini  mano  ka  rapa  te  wai. 

A great  number  will  easily  accomplish  what  a few  cannot. 

16.  He  aha  mau  ma  te  kotahi. 

What  can  a single  person  do. 

17.  Ko  te  uri  o pani. 

The  house  of  the  orphan. — A saying  for  a person  without 
family  or  friends,  who  has  no  power  or  influence. 

18.  Kotahi  te  koura  a wetaweta,  tutakina  te  hiku. 

Don’t  divide  the  cray  fish,  give  it  whole  (a  little  thing).  Simi- 
lar to  our  saying,  Don’t  make  two  bites  at  a cherry. 

19.  Ka  mau  ta  Maui  ki  tona  ringaringa  e kore  e taea  te  ruru. 

What  Maui  has  hold  of  he  will  not  give  up. — What  is  given 

cannot  be  taken  away. 

20.  Rere  i te  omanga,  wai  marire. 

What  has  been  given  don’t  seek  to  get  returned. 

21.  Ka  kotia  te  taitapu  ki  Hawaiki. 

The  road  to  Hawaiki  is  cut  off. — An  expression  used  by  a 
desperate  character  who  braves  the  laws  and  usages  of  his 
country.  He  has  passed  the  Rubicon. 

22.  Ko  turanga  o Potaka. 

Potaka  was  a lazy  fellow,  who  laid  in  bed  when  others  worked, 
and  got  up  to  work  when  they  were  coming  away. — A say- 
for  a lazy  man. 

28.  Ko  te  kai  rapu,  ko  ia  te  kite. 

He  who  seeks  finds. 

24.  Ko  ia  kahore  nei  i rapu,  te  kitea. 

He  who  does  not  seek  finds  not. 

25.  He  koura  kia  we  te  whero. 

Spoken  of  a person  easily  overpowered. — It  does  not  take  long 
to  turn  a cray  fish  red  by  boiling.  Another  meaning,  an 
angry  man  soon  turns  to  fight. 

26.  He  aruhe  kia  we  te  papa. 

Fern  root  is  soon  cooked. — Papa,  to  crack  or  burst,  as  it  does 
when  sufficiently  roasted. 

27.  Ko  te  koura  kei  te  upoko  te  tutae. 


296 


WAKATAUKI,  OR  PROVERBS. 


The  cray  fish  has  its  fundament  in  its  head. — Alluding  to  its 
color,  which  is  red  : though  he  is  smeared  with  ochre  like 
a gentleman,  his  head  is  only  filled  with  filthiness. 

28.  He  kiore  pukurua. 

The  rat  has  a double  stomach. — A saying  for  a greedy  fellow 
who  is  never  satisfied. 

29.  He  pounamu  kakano  rua. 

A green  stone  of  two  colors,  spotted  or  changeable  as  a cha- 
meleon, a highly-prized  kind  of  nephrite  or  jade. 

80.  Pihi  kau  ake  te  wakaaro  pai,  hauhake  tonu  iho. 

The  good  thought  springs  up  as  grass,  but  it  is  immediately 
cut  down. 

81.  Ka  tuhoa  te  ra,  ka  warara,  ka  hinga. 

The  sun  rises  to  its  zenith,  and  then  declines. — This  is  applied 
to  human  life. 

82.  Tena  te  kawenga,  a te  ringa  kokoparahia. 

The  man  who  does  not  permit  the  weed  kokoparahia,  to  cover 
his  farm,  is  also  strong  enough  to  overcome  his  enemies. 

83.  Mokonahatia  te  waha  o te  kuri  nei  ki  te  mokonaha,  kei  haere 

kei  tahae. 

The  dog’s  mouth  is  muzzled,  lest  it  should  steal. 

34.  Mata  rere  puku,  rite  tonu  ki  te  makutu,  mata  rakau,  e taea  te 

karo. 

The  blow  from  a bullet  like  a curse  strikes  unseen,  and  cannot 
be  warded  off  as  that  of  a wooden  weapon. 

35.  Ka  mate  ware  tahi,  ka  ora  ware  rua. 

Signifies  he  has  two  strings  to  his  bow. — A person  who  pos- 
sesses several  cultivations  ‘is  safe,  though  one  should  fail, 
the  others  will  support  him. 

36.  Ko  te  kura  i huna  ki  roto  ki  te  toto. 

A saying  for  the  pigeon,  when  it  is  skinned  and  the  bones  taken 
out ; previously  to  its  being  put  into  the  toto,  or  basket,  the 
flesh  is  quite  white. — This  is  applied  to  a handsome  man, 
whether  for  the  eye  or  mouth  is  rather  doubtful. 

37.  I kinitia  i roto  i te  matikuku  pango. 

It  was  pinched  within  the  end  of  the  finger  nail. — A saying  for 
a man  who  has  had  a very  narrow  escape. 

38.  Ka  ki  te  piro  o nga  manu,  o nga  tangata  ka  kata. 

When  the  stomach  is  full,  the  birds  sing,  the  men  laugh. 

39.  He  kuku  ki  te  kainga,  he  kaka  ki  te  haere. 


WAKATAUKI,  OR  PROVERBS. 


297 


A man  who  is  of  no  consequence  at  home,  is  one  of  importance 
abroad. — Literally  a pigeon  or  plain  bird  at  home — a parrot 
with  fine  red  plumage  abroad. 

40.  Ko  te  uri  o Kapu  manawa  witi. 

A saying  for  Te  Rauparaha  ; no  one  knew  his  thoughts,  whether 
they  were  for  good  or  evil. 

41.  Haere  te  amorangi  ki  mua,  te  hapaio  o te  taua  ki  muri. 

In  the  procession  the  priest  goes  before,  the  multitude  follows 
after. 

42.  Ko  Maru  kai  atu,  ko  Maru  kai  mai,  ka  ngohe  ngohe. 

Give  as  well  as  take,  and  all  will  be  well  (right). 

48.  Kaore  ana  he  au  ahi,  kapa  he  au  moana  e mate. 

Smoke  (literally  wind)  from  the  fire  soon  passes  away,  but 
wind  from  the  sea  causes  destruction  to  the  canoe. 

44.  He  ropu  hau,  he  ropu  tangata. 

A large  party  of  strangers  attracts  a large  number  of  lookers  on. 

45.  E kore  e mahana,  he  iti-iti  o te  puheru. 

There  is  no  warmth  in  the  garment  if  too  small. — A saying  for 
a small  war  party,  it  will  not  be  effective. 

46.  Kaore  ra  i te  kakahu  roroa,  automai  i raro  i te  whenua. 

When  the  garment  is  long  and  trails  along  the  ground,  then, 

indeed,  there  is  warmth. — A saying  for  a great  war  party. 

47.  I muia  Tinirau  i mate  ai. 

Because  Tinirau  was  overpowered  by  numbers  ; he  was  killed. — 
This  is  said  when  many  fall  upon  and  kill  a single  man. 

48.  Kapo  rere  te  kuri. 

The  dog  snatches  his  food  from  his  master’s  hand,  and  runs 
away. — So  a person  hears  what,  you  have  to  say,  without 
intending  to  follow  it. 

49.  I whea  koe  i te  tahuritanga  o te  Kotukutuku  ? 

Where  were  you  when  the  fuschia  came  into  leaf,  that  you  did 
not  plant  food  ? — A query  put  to  those  who  are  too  lazy  to 
cultivate  the  ground.  This  is  nearly  the  only  deciduous 
tree  of  New  Zealand. 

50.  He  iti  hoki  te  Mokoroa,  nana  i kakati  te  Kahikatea. 

Small  and  insignificant  as  the  Mokoroa,  a grub,  is,  yet  he  eats 
the  Kahikatea. — We  should  not  despise  an  enemy,  however 
feeble  he  may  appear  to  be. — The  Kahikatea  ( Podocarpus 
excelsus ) is  one  of  the  loftiest  trees  of  New  Zealand. 

51.  E hia  motunga  o te  Weka  i te  mahanga  ? 


298 


WAKATATTKI,  OR  PROVERBS. 


How  often  does  the  Weka  escape  from  the  snare  ? — One  who 
has  had  a very  narrow  escape,  will  take  care  not  to  fall 
into  the  same  danger  again, 

52.  He  Kotuku  rerenga  tahi. 

A Kotuku  whose  flight  is  seen  hut  once. — The  Kotuku,  or  New 
Zealand  Stork,  is  so  rare,  that  the  natives  say,  a person  can 
only  expect  to  see  it  once  in  his  lifetime.  This  is  applied 
to  a great  stranger. 

58.  Ka  pa  he  ra  e huru  mai  ana ; tena,  he  ra  e heke  ana. 

If  it  was  a sun  just  appearing,  well ; but  it  is  a sun  which  is 
setting. — When  an  old  man  is  very  ill,  there  is  little  hope  ; 
but  there  is  with  youth,  that  he  will  live  to  grow  up  ; with 
old  age,  the  day  wanes,  it  is  near  its  close. 

54.  He  iti,  he  iti  Kahikatoa. 

Though  small,  it  is  still  a Kahikatoa. — A man  should  not  be 
despised  on  account  of  his  diminutive  size  ; for  he  may  be 
like  the  Kahikatoa  ( Leptospetmum  scopariwn ),  which,  though 
only  a small  tree,  is  remarkable  for  its  strength  and  tough- 
ness. 

55.  Ka  roa  te  ngaromanga,  he  iti  te  putanga. 

Though  long  hidden,  it  will  be  only  small  when  seen. — This 
applies  to  a man  of  words,  but  not  of  deeds  : also  to  a war 
party,  which,  when  large,  is  confident  of  success,  and 
immediately  sets  out ; but,  when  small,  it  is  a long  time 
hesitating. 

56.  He  ringa  miti  tai  heke. 

A hand  which  licks  up  the  ebb  tide. — A Wanganui  saying  for 
the  people  who  live  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  within  the 
influence  of  the  tides.  Being  accustomed  to  contend  with 
the  ebb  tide,  they  can  manage  their  canoes  better  than  the 
natives  of  the  interior. 

57.  Tino  kai,  tino  ora  te  kopu. 

By  a constant  supply  of  food,  the  stomach  will  be  always  satis- 
fied.— A man  may  indeed  eat  plentifully  at  a feast  for  a day 
or  two ; but  he  who  has  the  produce  of  his  labour  stored 
up,  will  never  want. 

58.  Papaku  a ringaringa,  hohonu  a korokoro. 

The  hand  is  shallow,  has  little  in  it,  but  the  throat  is  deep. — 
A saying  for  a person  who  eats  much  but  works  little,  has 
no  food  in  his  store. 


WAKATAUKI,  OR  PROVERBS.  299 

59.  He  wahine  ki  uta,  he  kahawai  ki  roto  ki  te  wai. 

A woman  on  shore  ; a kahawai  in  the  sea. — The  kahawai  is  a 
fish  which  is  very  particular  in  selecting  the  hook  which 
most  resembles  its  food,  and  woman  is  the  most  difficult  to 
please  on  land  ; hence  the  saying,  “As  a kahawai  selects 
the  hook  which  pleases  it  best  out  of  a great  number,  so 
also  a woman  chooses  one  man  out  of  many.” 

60.  Mata  kitea,  maoa,  riro  ke. 

When  raw  it  is  seen  ; when  cooked  it  is  taken  away. — A say- 
ing used  when  persons  who  are  cooking  food  see  a party  of 
strangers  approaching.  It  is  better  to  eat  the  food  only 
half  cooked,  than  wait  and  have  to  divide  with  others. 

61.  Ka  ngaro  a mo  a te  iwi  nei. 

This  tribe  will  become  extinct  like  the  moa.  The  moa,  or 
dinornis,  was  a very  large  bird,  which  is  supposed  to 
he  extinct,  the  bones  only  having  been  discovered.  It 
would  be  thus  with  the  tribe  alluded  to  ; the  people  would 
all  die,  and  their  skeletons  only  remain  to  show  what  once 
they  had  been. 

62.  He  titi  rere  ao,  ka  kitea;  he  titi  rere  po,  e kore  e kitea. 

The  titi,  mutton  bird,  which  flies  in  the  day  time  is  seen  ; but 
the  titi  which  flies  in  the  night  is  not. — Used  when  a stranger 
arrives  at  a village  in  the  night,  being  unseen,  he  is  not 
welcomed  till  he  gets  into  the  pa.  The  titi  is  a sea  bird 
which  only  goes  inland  at  night. 

68.  Ki  te  hamama  popoia  te  tangata,  e kore  e mau  te  ika. 

If  a man  yawns  whilst  fishing,  he  will  be  unsuccessful. — A 
saying  which  is  applied  to  a person  who  has  not  persever- 
ance enough  to  finish  what  he  has  begun,  yawning  being  a 
sure  sign  of  weariness. 

64.  E kore  e taka  te  parapara  a ona  tupuna,  tukua  iho  ki  a ia. 

He  cannot  lose  the  spirit  of  his  ancestors  ; it  must  descend  to 

him. — This  saying  is,  perhaps,  identical  with  ours,  “A  chip 
of  the  old  block.” 

65.  Ka  tangi  te  karewarewa  ki  waenga  o te  rangi  pai,  ka  ua  apopo  ; 

ka  tangi  ki  waenga  o te  rangi  ua,  ka  paki  apopo. 

If  the  sparrow-hawk  screams  on  a fine  day,  it  will  rain  on  the 
morrow  ; if  it  screams  on  a rainy  day,  it  will  be  fine  on  the 
morrow. 

66.  I hea  koe  i te  tangihanga,  o te  riroriro  ? 


300 


WAKATAUKI,  OR  PROVERBS. 


Where  were  you  when  the  riroriro  first  sung  ? — The  riroriro  is 
a small  bird  whose  note  is  heard  in  the  spring,  and  is  one  of 
the  signs  of  approaching  summer.  This  saying  is  applied 
to  a person  who  is  too  idle  to  plant  food  at  the  proper 
season,  and  complains  of  hunger  in  the  winter. 

67.  Haere  ki  Patiarero. 

Go  to  Patiarero. — A Wanganui  saying,  Go,  that  they  may  eat 
you.  This  is  said  when  any  one  is  bent  upon  running  into 
danger. 

68.  He  kokonga  ware  e taea  te  rapurapu  ; he  kokonga  ngakau  ekore 

e taea. 

We  can  thoroughly  search  every  corner  of  a house  ; but  those 
of  the  heart  we  cannot. 

69.  He  kai  koutou  ka  hohoro,  ko  te  ngaki  ekore. 

You  are  forward  to  eat,  but  not  to  work. 

70.  Te  wai  Toki  i te  rangi. 

Cook’s  water  from  heaven. — This  was  the  name  given  by  the 
natives  to  rum,  when  Captain  Cook  first  gave  it  to  them. 
It  is  now  used  for  anything  sweet. 

71.  Kia  wakaara  koe  i taku  moe,  ko  te  watu  turei  a Rua. 

When  you  disturb  my  rest,  let  it  be  for  the  Hinau  bread  of 
Rua. — Rua  was  one  of  the  first  persons  who  arrived  in  New 
Zealand,  and  commenced  making  bread  from  the  Hinau 
(Elceocctrpus  Hinau),  which  has  therefore  been  named  after 
him.  It  is  so  highly  prized  by  the  natives,  that  "'they  say  it 
is  the  only  food  for  which  a wearied  man  should  be  waked 
out  of  his  sleep. 

72.  He  pata  ua  ki  runga,  he  ngutu  tangata  ki  raro. 

A continual  dropping  of  rain  from  above,  and  chattering  of 
men’s  lips  below. — This  is  applied  to  a man  who  is  beset 
on  all  sides  with  annoyances,  and  can  find  no  way  of 
escape. 

78.  E kore  e kitea  te  tui  i nga  toke  i te  pouri. 

You  cannot  see  how  to  thread  worms  in  the  dark. — This  is  said 
when  it  is  time  to  leave  off  work,  and  refers  to  the  custom 
of  threading  worms  on  a string,  as  a bait  for  eels. 

74.  Tena  te  ringa  tango  parahia. 

That  is  a hand  which  roots  out  the  parahia. — This  saying  is 
applied  to  a diligent  husbandman.  The  parahia  is  a dimi- 
nutive kind  of  spinach,  which  overruns  their  cultivations, 
and  if  not  eradicated  kills  everything. 


WAKATAUKI,  OR  PROVERBS. 


301 


75.  Ngahuru  ki  runga,  ngahuru  ki  raro  ; ma  te  paroparo  e aki. 

There  are  ten  teeth  above,  and  ten  below  ; let  the  strength  of 

the  jaw  bring  them  together. — When  food  is  tough  and 
only  half  cooked,  it  will  be  necessary  to  use  more  force  in 
chewing  it. 

76.  E moe  ana  te  mata  hi  tuna,  e ara  ana  te  mata  hi  awa. 

The  eyes  of  those  who  fish  for  eels  are  closed,  but  the  eyes 
of  those  who  fish  for  the  awa  are  opened. — Eels  bite 
during  the  night  when  the  lines  are  laid,  but  the  awa  only 
by  day.  Some  persons  sleep  during  a siege,  while  others 
are  watching ; they  who  keep  awake  prevent  the  pa  being 
surprised  by  the  enemy. 

77.  Tama  tu,  tama  ora  ; tama  noho,  tama  mate  kai. 

The  man  who  stands  up  to  work  will  be  satisfied ; but  he  who 
sits  down  will  want  food. 

78.  Tu  ke  raumati,  wakapiri  ngahuru. 

You  keep  at  a distance  in  summer,  but  stick  close  in  harvest. — 
This  is  used  for  a lazy  fellow,  who  runs  away  during  the 
working  season,  and  does  not  return  till  the  crops  are  dug 
up. 

79.  Me  te  tarakihi  e papa  ana  i te  waru. 

Like  the  cicada  chirping  in  the  eighth  month,  or  spring. — A 
saying  when  there  is  much  food,  there  is  also  much  talking. 

80.  He  urunga  ekore  e wakaarahia  hau  kino. 

A pillow  that  is  not  raised  by  a tempest. — This  saying  is 
applied  to  the  top  of  Tongariro,  which  is  so  lofty  and 
difficult  of  access,  that  whoever  takes  refuge  there  is  safe 
from  his  enemies. 

81.  Ekore  e hohoro  te  opeope  o te  otaota. 

The  weeds  will  not  be  soon  eradicated. — Applied  to  a large 
war  party,  which  will  not  be  easily  vanquished. 

82.  Haere  e wai  i te  waewae  o Uenuku,  kia  ora  ai  te  tangata. 

By  going  to  the  feet  of  Uenuku,  a man’s  life  may  be  saved. — 
Uenuku  was  famed  for  his  wisdom  ; therefore,  to  sit  at  his 
feet  implied  to  learn  wisdom,  by  which  a man  might  be  able 
to  preserve  his  life  in  the  midst  of  danger. 

88.  Ehara  te  urunga  tangata,  he  urunga  panekeneke. 

It  is  not  good  to  lean  upon  a man,  for  he  is  a moving  bolster. 

84.  E hara  te  toa  taua,  he  toa  pahekeheke  ? Ko  te  toa  ngaki  kai 
ekore  e paheke. 


302 


FABLES. 


Is  not  the  warrior  liable  to  fall  ? but  the  diligent  tiller  of 
the  soil  never.  What  does  it  benefit  a man,  though  brave 
in  war,  when  his  reward  is  uncertain  ? But  a man  who  is 
brave,  or  diligent,  in  tilling  the  ground,  is  sure  of  his. 

85.  Kohia  te  kai  rangatira,  ruia  ta  taitea. 

Gather  the  best  food,  throw  the  worst  away. 


The  following  are  a few  specimens  of  He  Korero  Tara,  or 
Fables : — 


1. 


The  Sweet  Potatoe,  Kumara,  and  The  Fern-root,  Hoi. 


Kumar  a. — Mataharuharu ; no- 
hoanga  roa  i te  ahi  te  ahi ; roke 
nui. 

Hoi. — Ahakoa  ra  au  kino,  ka- 
wea  au  ki  te  wai,  raupitia,  taka 
mai  te  muri-tai  e taka  ra. 


Kumara. — Sitting  long  by  the 
fire  ; face  wet  with  tears  ; large 
hard  lump. 

Hoi. — Though  I am  bad,  take 
me  to  the  water ; press  me  ; let 
the  sea  breeze  come,  how  sweet ! 


Formerly  fern-root  was  nearly  the  sole  food  of  the  natives  during 
the  winter  months.  It  was  beaten  indoors,  on  account  of  the  con- 
stant rain,  and  their  houses  being  always  filled  with  smoke,  the 
eyes  were  as  constantly  suffused  with  tears. 

This  seems  to  be  uttered  by  way  of  reproach,  the  fern-root  being 
an  unsightly  lump  ; but,  when  properly  prepared,  it  is  not  at  all 
unpalatable. 

The  moral  of  the  fable  appears  to  be,  that,  although  the  kumara 
be  more  palatable,  yet  it  is  neither  so  abundant,  nor  does  it  last  so 
long,  as  the  fern-root,  which  is  always  in  season. 


2. 

The  Eel,  Tuna , and  The  Cod-fish,  Hapuku. 


Wapuku. — Tehea  tau  wahi 
momona  ? 

Tuna. — Momona  ake  i taku 
hiku,  a taku  tongahau  ; a ka  eke 
ki  runga  ki  a Tumatua,  ka  noho 
tau  tokorua.  Tehea  tau  ? 


Wapuku. — Which  is  your  best 
part  ? 

Tuna. — I am  good  from  my 
tail  to  my  middle  ; and  if  you 
get  to  the  top  of  Tumatua,  you 
can  sit  two  together.  Which  is 
your  good  part  ? 


FABLES. 


303 


Wapuku. — Momona  a hiku,  Wapuku. — I am  good  in  my 

momona  a tara  ; ka  kake  i te  tail,  and  good  in  my  fins  : if  you 
kakenga  i a Tumatua  ka  noho-  climb  to  the  top  of  Tumatua,  you 
noho  tau  tokorua.  may  sit  two  together. 

The  Wapuku  again  asks  the  Tuna  which  is  its  fattest  part.  The 
Tunu  looks  significantly  at  its  tail,  and  refers  the  question  back  to 
the  Wapuku,  who,  in  his  turn,  opens  his  eyes  wide,  signifying  that 
his  head  was  the  fattest  part  of  his  body. 


8. 

The  Guana,  Tuatara,  and  The  Kock-cod,  Kumukumu. 


Tuatara. — E te  Kumukumu, 
ka  haere  taua  ki  uta. 

Kumukumu. — Kahore  ; haere 
koe  ki  uta. 

Tuatara. — E,  haere  mai,  ka 
pau  koe  i te  tangata. 

Kumukumu. — Kahore ; ekore 
au  e pau : ko  koe  anake  te  pau. 

Tuatara.— E kore  au  e pau  ; 
tuku  aku  tara,  rarau  aku  pe- 
ke,  mataku  te  tangata,  oma 
ki  tawiti. 


Tuatara. — Kumukumu,  let  us 
go  inland. 

Kumukumu. — No  ; go  yourself. 

Tuatara . — Come,  lest  you  be 
destroyed  by  man. 

Kumukumu. — No  ; I shall  not 
be  destroyed  : it  is  you  that  men 
will  destroy. 

Tuatara. — I shall  not  be  des- 
troyed ; I will  set  up  my  spines,  I 
will  stick  out  my  claws,  it  is  man 
that  will  be  afraid,  and  run  away. 


4. 

The  Pine  tree,  Kauri , and  The  Whale,  Tohora. 


Toliora. — E te  Kauri,  haere 
mai  taua  ki  tai  nei. 

Kauri. — Teka  ra.  Ko  konei 
ra  au  ko  taku  wahi. 

Tohora. — Taua  ra  ka  hoko 
kiri : meake  koe  tuakina  e te 
tangata,  a ka  haua  koe  hei 
waka. 


Tohora. — Kauri,  come  to  sea 
with  me. 

Kauri. — No,  I prefer  my  own 
element. 

Tohora. — Then  let  us  change 
skins ; for  you  are  in  danger  of 
being  cut  down  by  man,  and  made 
into  a canoe. 


They  accordingly  exchanged  skins.  This  is  the  reason  assigned 
for  the  bark  of  the  kauri  being  so  thin  and  as  full  of  resin  as  the 
whale  is  of  oil. 


304 


FABLES. 


5. 


The  Shark,  Te  Tuatini, 

Ka  mea  atu  te  Tuatini  ki  te 
Ngarara,  haere  mai  taua  ki  roto 
ki  te  wai.  Ka  mea  atu  te  Nga- 
rara kahore.  Ka  mea  atu  te  Tua- 
tini, akuanei  au  ka  wakarongo 
mai  ki  a koe  e murumuru  ana  ki 
te  ahi  rarauhe;  Ka  mea  atu  hoki 
te  Ngarara,  apopo  hoki  au  waka- 
rongo rawa  atu  ki  a koe  e kuru- 
kurua  ana  koe  ki  te  papa  o te 
waka. 


and  The  Lizard,  Ngarara. 

The  Tuatini  said  to  the  Nga- 
rara, come,  let  us  go  together 
into  the  sea.  But  the  Ngarara 
said,  No.  The  Tuatini  retorted, 
I shall  hear  you  before  long  in 
the  flames  of  the  blazing  fern. 
The  Ngarara  answered  him  again, 
to-morrow  when  I listen,  I shall 
hear  you  dashed  against  the  side 
of  the  canoe. 


This  is  spoken  ironically.  The  Tuatini  tells  the  Ngarara,  Soon 
you  will  wish  you  had  listened  to  me,  when  you  are  being  consumed 
in  the  blazing  fern ; and  the  Ngarara  replies,  You  will  soon  wish 
that  you  had  taken  my  advice,  when  you  are  caught  by  the  fisher- 
man and  killed  against  the  side  of  his  canoe. 


6. 

The  Bat,  Kiore,  and  The  Green  Paroquet,  Pouwhaitere. 


Pouwdaitere. — E kio  e,  ka 
piki  taua  ki  runga. 

Kiore. — Ki  te  aha  taua  i 
runga  ? 

Pouwhaitere. — Ki  te  kai  pua 
rakau. 

Kiore. — E aha  te  pua  rakau  ? 

Pouwhaitere. — He  miro,  he 
kahikatea. 

Kiore. — E tama  ra  e — ko  te 
waka  rua  rua  i a taua  ; e tama 
ra — e — e haere  mai  nei  te  tan- 
gata,  e ronarona  nei  i te  kaki 
torete  te  wai  au,  ti  mau  rawa. 


Pouivhaitere. — Okio  (short  for 
rat)  let  us  climb  up  into  the  tree. 

Kiore. — What  shall  we  do 
there  ? 

Pouwhaitere.- — Eat  the  fruit  of 
the  trees. 

Kiore. — What  kind  of  fruits  ? 

Pouivhaitere. — That  of  the  miro 
and  kahikatea. 

Kiore. — My  friend,  both  our 
tribes  are  diminishing ; man  comes 
and  twists  your  neck,  torete  te  wai 
(the  imitation  of  the  bird’s  cry  of 
pain,)  and  as  for  me,  I shall  be 
caught  in  his  snare. 


Moral — No  escape  from  man’s  power. 


FABLES. 


•305 


7. 

The  Ante  and  the  Whau . 

Wliau. — Hei  kona  koe,  tu  ai  Whau . — Here  you  are  decking 

hei  parepare.  a woman’s  head. 

Ante. — Haere  koe  ki  te  mo-  Ante. — Go  you  to  sea  to  make 

ana  hei  whau  kupenga,  ka  mutu  the  net  float,  and  when  the  fishing 
hei  pouto  kupenga.  is  over  remain  attached  to  it. 

The  Whau  (Entelia  arborescens ),  a light  wood  used  instead  of 
cork.  Aute,  the  inner  bark  of  the  Hoheria  populnea,  used  as 
ribbon. 

Moral — One  office  or  business  is  as  good  as  another. 


Many  of  their  Songs,  which  are  extremely  numerous,  contain 
very  beautiful  ideas ; the  metre  is  difficult  to  describe  ; there 
being  no  regular  measure  of  verse;  the  chief  object  is  to 
make  the  lines  suit  their  tunes,  which  a musical  gentleman 
described  as  reminding  him  of  the  Gregorian  chants. 

They  have  songs  on  every  subject,  on  love  and  war,  as 
well  as  incantations,  laments,  and  traditions,  and  no  man 
would  be  esteemed  an  eloquent  orator  if  he  could  not  intro- 
duce quotations  from  them,  containing  allusions  applicable 
to  the  subject  on  which  he  is  speaking.  In  addition  to 
these  there  are  numerous  nursery  and  boat  songs.  The 
deeds  of  their  warriors  are  thus  handed  down. 


ITINERARY  AND  TRADITION  SONG. 


307 


Ko  te  popo  a Te  Rangitakoru  mo 

tana  tamahine , mo  Wharaurangi. 

E hine  aim,  ki  to  kunenga  mai  i 
tawiti, 

Ki  te  whakaringaringa,  ki  te 
whakawaewae, 

Te  wakakanohi-tanga,  ka  manu, 
e hine,  te  waka  i a Ruatea, 

Ko  Kurahanpo,  ka  iri  mai  tana, 
i runga  i Aotea  ko  te  waka  ia 
Tun, 

Kan  mai  tana  te  ngutu  Whenua 
kura, 

Hanga  iho  te  whare  Rangitawhi ; 

Tiria  mai  te  kumara, 

Ka  ruia  mai  te  karaka  ki  te  taiao 
nei ; 

Karia  iho  te  pon  Tamawahinei, 

Ka  waiho  i Nga  tna  hine,  i a 
Nonoko-uri, 

I a Nonoko-tea,  ko  te  Here- 
runga,  ko  te  Korohunga. 

Kapua  mai  e Han  ko  te  one  ki  te 
ringa, 

Ko  te  tokotoko.  Ka  witi  i te  awa, 

Ka  nui  ia,  ko  Wanga-nui ; 

Tiehutia  te  wai,  ko  Wangae-hu  ; 

Ka  hinga  te  rakau,  ko  Turakina ; 

Tikeitia  te  waewae,  ko  Tikei ; 

Ka  tatu,  e hine,  ko  Manawatu ; 

Ka  rorohio  nga  taringa,  ko  Ho- 
kio ; 

Waiho  te  awa  iti  hei  ingoa  mona 
ki  Ohau ; 


Te  Rangitakoru1  s nursery  song  for 
his  daughter,  for  Wharaurangi. 

0,  my  daughter,  when  you  came 
from  afar, 

And  your  hands  were  formed, 
and  your  feet, 

And  your  face,  you  floated,  0 
daughter, 

In  theKurahaupo,Ruatea’s  canoe, 
When  you  embarked  in  the  Ao- 
tea, the  canoe  of  Turi, 

You  forded  the  Whenua  kura  at 
its  mouth, 

There  was  made  the  house  of 
Rangitawi ; 

Let  us  plant  the  kumara, 

And  sow  the  karaka,  in  the  land 
bordering  the  sea ; 

Sink  deep  the  post  Tamawahinei, 
Leave  it  for  Nga  tua  hine,  from 
Nonoko-uri, 

From  Nonoko-tea,  the  Hererunga 
and  Korohunga. 

Hau  took  up  some  sand  in  the 
palm  of  his  hand,  and  his  staff. 
When  he  crossed  over  the  river, 
Finding  it  was  wide  he  called  it 
Wanga-nui ; 

Splash  the  water,  that  will  reach 
Wangae-hu  ; [rakina  ; 

The  length  of  a fallen  tree,  is  Tu- 
Having  many  times  lifted  up  his 
feet,  Tikei ; 

When  his  heart  sank  within  him, 
Manawatu  ; 

When  the  wind  whistled  past  his 
ears,  Hokio  ; 

The  small  river  he  called,  Ohau ; 


308 


ITINERARY  AND  TRADITION  SONG. 


Takina  te  tokotoko,  ko  Otaki ; 

Ka  mehameha,  e hine,  ko  Wai- 
mea  ; 

Ka  ngahae  nga  pi,  ko  Wai-ka- 
nae  ; 

Ka  tangi  ko  te  mapu,  e liine, 

Ka  kite  koe  i a Wai  raka ; 
Matapoutia. 

Poua  ki  runga,  pona  ki  raro, 

Ka  raran,  e hine.  Ka  rarapa 
nga  kanohi, 

And  she  remained  immovable. 
Ko  Wai-rarapa 
Te  rarapatanga  o to  tupuna, 

E hine  — ka  moiki  te  ao, 

Ko  te  pai  a Waitiri ; 

Knmea  kia  warea  Kaitangata 
Ki  waho  ki  te  moana  : 

Hanga  te  paepae,  poua  iho,  te  pou 
Whakamaro  te  rangi,  ko  Mere- 
mere  : 

Waiho  te  Whanau,  ko  te  punga 

0 tona  waka  ko  te  Awhema. 
Kati,  ka  waka  mutu,  e hine. 


When  he  carried  his  staff  in  a 
horizontal  position,  Otaki ; 

When  he  prayed,  0 daughter,  it 
was  Wai-mea  ; 

When  he  looked  out  of  the  corner 
of  his  eye,  Wai-kanae  ; 

When  he  became  weary,  my 
daughter,  he  reached Wai-raka. 

He  repeated  an  incantation, 

She  became  fixed  above,  and 
fixed  below, 

My  daughter,  when  his  eyes 
glistened  with  delight, 

He  called  the  place  Wai-rarapa, 

It  was  the  rejoicing  of  your  an- 
cestor, my  daughter. 

The  sky  became  cloudless, 

On  account  of  Waitiri’s  good  will. 

She  then  enticed  Kaitangata  out 
to  sea  : 

She  placed  the  plank  across, 

And  drove  it  in  a post  to  hold  on 
by,  called  Meremere. 

She  left  to  her  offspring,  Punga, 
the  anchor  of  his  canoe, 

As  his  name,  Awhema. 

Enough,  it  is  finished,  0 my 
daughter. 


Hau  came  in  one  of  the  canoes  above  mentioned.  He 
undertook  the  journey  to  look  for  Wai-raka,  his  wife,  who 
had  eloped  with  a man  named  Weku  ; upon  reaching 
the  first  river,  he  named  it,  from  its  great  width,  Wanga- 
nui (the  great  mouth),  passing  on  to  the  next  river,  he 
describes  it  as  being  so  near  that  he  could  splash  the 
water  of  the  Wanga-nui  as  far,  and,  therefore  named  it 
Wanga-ehu  (the  splashed  mouth),  from  tiheu , which  signifies 
to  splash,  or  bale  water;  the  next  was  so  near,  that  if  he 


SONGS. 


309 


felled  a tree  growing  on  the  banks  of  the  Wanga-ehu,  the 
head  of  it  would  reach  the  river  which  he  called  Tura-kina 
(felled) , from  turaki , to  throw  down,  having  to  walk  a con- 
siderable distance  to  the  next  river,  he  called  it  Tikei  (a 
pace)  from  tikei , the  action  of  the  legs  in  walking,  it  is  now 
called  Rangitikei ; passing  on,  he  came  to  a large  river, 
which  he  feared  he  should  not  be  able  to  cross  : this,  there- 
fore, he  named  Manawa-tu  (the  depressed  spirit),  as  he  pro- 
ceeded on  his  way,  the  wind  whistled  past  his  ears,  and  he 
called  the  place  where  he  was  at  the  time  Hokio ; the  next 
small  creek  he  called  Ohau,  perhaps  after  himself ; he  now 
carried  his  staff  in  a horizontal  position,  the  next  river  was, 
therefore,  called  Otaki,  from  taki,  to  level  a spear  when 
making  a charge  ; when  he  strengthened  himself  by  praying 
and  repeating  a karakia,  he  called  the  place  Wai-mea,  from 
meha-meha , to  make  sacred ; at  the  next  river  he  looked  out 
slyly  from  the  corner  of  his  eye  to  see  if  he  could  discover 
his  wife,  and  called  the  place  Waikanae,  he  breathed  hard 
when  he  reached  the  place,  where  Wairaka  was  sitting  with 
her  paramour  at  Te  Paripari,  the  termination  of  the  Tararua 
range,  he  said  to  her,  Wairaka,  I am  exceedingly  thirsty  ; 
fetch  me  some  water,  she  got  up  and  walked  down  to  the 
sea  with  a calabash  in  each  hand ; when  she  was  up  to  her 
knees,  she  commenced  filling  them ; he  called  to  her  to  go 
further ; she  went  in  up  to  her  waist ; he  bid  her  go  still 
deeper,  and  she  went  on  again  till  the  water  nearly  covered 
her  shoulders,  he  then  repeated  a karakia,  she  became  petri- 
fied, and  has  remained  so  ever  since ; leaving  her  there,  a 
rock  in  the  sea,  still  bearing  her  name,  he  joyfully  went  on 
his  way,  and  called  the  next  place  Wairarapa  (the  river  of 
joyfulness),  from  rarajpa , the  glistening  of  the  eyes  with 
delight.  The  poet  then  informs  his  daughter  that  it  was 
the  rejoicing  of  her  ancestor. 

A reference  is  here  made  to  the  myth  of  Waitiri’s  erection 
of  a temple  of  Cloacina,  which  is  a chief  Maori  constellation. 
“ Hanga  te  jpaepae  ” means,  literally,  to  form  a barrier,  but 
is  here  a large  plank,  for  which  the  stake  called  meremere* 
* Meremere,  the  evening  star. 


310 


SONGS. 


was  also  required.  This  and  the  remainder  forms  a portion 
of  the  myth  of  Tawaki. 

The  song  is  a very  interesting  one  as  it  gives  the  origin 
of  the  name  for  every  place  from  Wanganui  to  Wairarapa. 
In  another  version,  it  is  attributed  to  Turi,  and  begins  at 
Patea. 


He  Wciiatci  Aroha. 

A Love  Bong,  composed  by  a young  woman  of  the  Nga-ti 
kahununui  tribe. 


Mapunapuna  ai, 

He  wai  kei  aku  kamo  ; 

Noho  mai  i roto  na, 

Kei  korerotia  nahaku  tonu 
koe. 

Kei  ringa  mau,  e ! 

Mo  te  Maunu  ra, 

E kai  nei  i au. 

Me  tangi  atu  au, 

E hika,  ki  a koe, 

Te  tangi  a Tinirau, 

Ki  tana  mokai,  kia  Tutunui, 
Ka  mate  i a Ngae. 

Na  ! 


The  tears  gush  from  my  eyes, 

My  eyelashes  are  wet  with  tears ; 
But  stay  my  tears  within, 

Lest  you  should  be  called  mine. 

Alas  ! I am  betrothed  (literally, 
my  hands  are  bound). 

It  is  for  te  Maunu, 

That  my  love  devours  me. 

But  I may  weep  indeed, 

Beloved  one,  for  thee. 

Like  Tinirau’ s lament 
For  his  favorite  pet,  Tutunui, 
Which  was  slain  by  Ngae. 

Alas  ! 


He  Waiata  Aroha. 


A Love  Bong,  composed  by  a 
prisoner  by  Hongi  Hika, 

Takotomai  te  marino, 
Horahia  i waho  na  ; 

Hei  paki  omanga 
Mo  Waowaotupuni. 

Noku  te  wareware, 

Te  wai  rangi  au 
Te  hukanga  wai  hoe, 

Nau,  e Ahurei ! 

Kai  tonu  ki  te  rae, 

Ki  Kohirae  ; 

Marama  te  titiro 


person  whose  friend  had  been  taken 
at  the  Biver  Thames,  in  1828. 

Smooth  is  the  sea, 

Spread  out  in  open  space ; 

Fair  and  clear 

For  Waowaotupuni  to  run. 

The  forgetfulness  is  mine, 

That  I do  not  follow 
In  the  splash  of  the  oar, 

Of  thee,  0 Ahurei ! 

With  the  eye  to  the  point, 

Even  to  Kohirae  ; 

From  whence  can  be  seen 


SONGS. 


311 


Te  puia  i Wakaari. 
Kei  te  ruru  tonu  mai, 
Ka  wehe  te  marino  ! 
Hei  kawe  i a koe 
Te  pou  o te  kupenga. 
Na,  Taramainuku, 
Kowai  an  ka  kite. 
Kurehu  ai  te  titiro, 
Ki  Moehau  raia. 

Me  kawe  rawa  ra, 
Hei  hoko  paura  ; 

Ki  tawiti  riro  ra, 

Ki  te  ketunga  rimu. 


The  steam  on  Wakaari.  * 

How  fine  and  how  calm, 

How  smooth  and  how  fair  ! 

To  carry  you 

To  the  post  of  the  net, 

Of  Taramainuku, 

A stranger  to  me. 

The  sight  has  become  dim, 

By  looking  at  Moehau. 

He  is  taken  to  extreme  distance, 
To  buy  powder ; 

Yea,  to  extreme  distance, 

From  whence  the  sea-weed  is 
thrown  up. 


He  Waiata  Arolici. 


A Love  Song. 


E to  e te  ra ! rehu  ki  te  rua, 

Ringiringi  a wai,  te  roimata  i 
akn  kamo. 

He  mea  mahue  au  te  hikoinga 
wae, 

Nou,  e Taratiu,  wakangaro 
atu  ana. 

Nga  kurae  koe,  o Waiohi- 
para,  wakaahu  ahi  ana  to 
tara  ki  miti  tai. 

Kei  raro  taku  atua  e aroha 
nei  au. 

Kati  te  wairua  te  mahi  te 
haramai ; 

Ka  mutu  i ahaunei  toku,  tan- 
gi  hanga. 


0 set  thou  sun!  sink  into  thy 
cavern, 

Thou  causest  to  gush  like  water 
the  tears  from  my  eyes. 

1 am  a deserted  one  through  the 
stepping  out  of  the  feet, 

Of  thee,  0 Taratiu,  long  hidden 
from  my  sight. 

Thy  distant  hills,  Waiohipara,  and 
the  flowing  surface  of  the  wa- 
ter, appear  bright  like  a fire. 

My  idol,  whom  I love,  is  below. 

Let  thy  spirit  cease  from  visiting 
me  ; 

If,  perchance,  I may  forget  my 
sorrowing. 


Te  Tcingi  a te  Uangiwakaurua. 

Rangiwakaurua’s  Lament. 

Nei  ka  noho  i te  po  roa  o Here  I sit  through  summer’s  long 
Matiti.  night. 

* The  volcano  of  White  Island. 


312 


SONGS. 


Mokohiti  noa  te  tan  o takn 
ate. 

Nnkn  mai,  e hine,  kia  pin 
mai  koe ; 

Wakarnkeruke  noa  i runga  i 
aku  ringa. 

Kia  marama  an,  me  titiro  ki 
nta, 

Ki  te  waka  tukn  mai,  ki  te 
ao  rere  mai. 

Paneke  ake  ana  te  tara  ki 
Hanmapu. 

Ko  o tipnna  i ora,  i koki  mai 
ki  an  ; 

Ka  ruia  raton  ki  raro  ki  Pae- 
ran. 

E Toko  ma,  e ! nau  mai  ki 
konei : 

Ka  puhangarua  an,  nga  toro 
a tawiti. 

He  maka  win  an  kia  tnrakina 
atn 

Nga  nrn  rakan  ki  Tahorapa- 
roa  ; 

Kia  manrn  ake  ai  te  aroha, 

I an  ki  takn  whenna. 


My  heart  is  always  beating  for 
my  beloved. 

Come  near  me,  my  daughter,  and 
keep  by  my  side ; 

Tbon  art  ever  restless  when  I 
nnrse  thee. 

Obstruct  not  my  vision  while  gaz- 
ing inland 

At  the  approaching  canoe  and 
the  cloud  drawing  near. 

Its  edge  ; as  it  rises  by  Hau- 
mapu. 

Thy  ancestors  lived  and  remained 
with  me  ; 

But  they  are  driven  downwards 
to  Paeran. 

0 Toko  and  thy  party  welcome 
here  : 

1 am  afflicted  with  a disease  from 

afar. 

I must  baste  to  hew  down 

The  thicket  of  spears  at  Tahora- 
paroa ; 

That  my  spirits  may  be  soothed. 

Which  are  excited  for  my  land. 


The  natives  consider  their  lands  as  their  ancestors,  be- 
cause they  always  remain  in  the  family ; though  the  original 
possessors  have  passed  away,  the  lands  are  still  the  same, 
and  descend  from  the  fathers  to  their  children.  Te  Rangi- 
wakaurua’s  possessions  had  been  over-run  by  the  Ngati- 
maru,  who  had  burned  his  forests  and  destroyed  his  property  ; 
he,  therefore,  informs  his  daughter,  Te  Oiroa,  that  though 
he  belonged  to  her  ancestors,  they  were  now  destroyed  and 
sent  down  to  Paerau,  one  of  the  abodes  of  departed  spirits. 

The  words  “ nga  urn  rakau  ” mean  literally  a thicket  of 
trees,  though  used  here  for  one  of  spears,  in  allusion  to  the 
great  number  of  invaders.  Tahoraparoa  is  the  general  name 
given  to  his  land. 


SONGS. 


313 


Kg  te  Tangi  a te  Ngahuru. 
Ngahuru’s  Lament. 


E mnri  aliiahi  ka  totoko  te 
aroha, 

Wairua  o te  hanga  ka  wehe  i 
akan. 

Wai  te  teretere,  e rere  i wa- 
ho  ra  ? • 

Non,  e te  Kohu ! E hoki 
kouton, 

Kip  a ki  te  whenua,  ki  Ma- 
ketn  raia. 

Tenei  matou,  kei  runga  i te 
toka. 

Me  rauhi  mai  te  wairua  kau, 

Te  waka  rae!  i tataia  mai. 

Toroa  i te  wai,  kia  paia  atu 
koe, 

Haere  ki  raro  ra,  ki  Hauraki 
raia, 

Hei  matakitaki  mate  nni  a 
Timaru, 

Nei  ka  pae  noa  ki  Maukaha 
raia,  i ! 


In  the  evening  my  love  melts 
within  me, 

For  the  spirit  of  the  being  who  is 
separated  from  me. 

Whose  is  the  company  that  sails 
along  yonder  ? 

It  is  thine,  0 Kohu  ! But  do  you 
return, 

Towards  the  mainland,  even  to 
Maketu. 

Here  are  we,  clinging  to  a rock. 

We  may  weep  over  the  wreck 

Of  the  canoe,  alas  ! which  was 
so  gaily  adorned 

With  Albatross  feathers  from  the 
ocean  to  excite  admiration, 

When  we  went  northward  to  Hau- 
raki, 

And  were  looked  upon  with  envy 
by  the  Ngatimaru. 

But  now  it  is  wrecked  upon  Mau- 
kaha, Alas  ! 


Te  Tangi  a te  Uira/' 

Uria’s  Lament. 

Ba  te  haeata,  The  bright  sun-beams 

Takiri  ana  Shoot  down  upon 


* Te  Uira  was  a lady  of  great  rank,  and  mother  of  the  celebrated  warrior 
and  renowned  orator,  Te  Maniapoto,  chief  of  the  tribe  of  Ngatimaniapoto,  living 
on  the  banks  of  the  Waikato  river,  near  the  borders  of  the  Taupo  Lake.  At 
the  time  of  her  decease,  he  was  at  Tauwhara,  a high  mountain  near  Waipaihi, 
digging  red  ochre  with  his  principal  warriors  ; the  dying  mother  could  see  the 
mountain  from  her  death  bed,  and  remarked  that  it  came  between  her  and 
the  spot  where  her  son,  sometimes  called  Te  Amo,  was  at  work  ; she  desired 
her  weeping  friends  not  to  try  to  console  her  ; that  she  had  but  a short  time  to 
live,  and  wished  thus  to  show  her  love  for  her  son,  as  she  was  now  about  to 
join  her  departed  husband. 


314 


SONGS. 


Ki  Tan  war  a ra; 

Pae  tan  arai  ki  a koe, 

E Amo,  e aroha  nei  an. 
Waiho  ra  mata, 

Kia  mihi  an, — 

Kia  roa  i te  mihinga — 
Ka  tukn  tenei, 

Ki  te  tai  pouri, 

Ki  takn  makan  mate. 


Tanwara,  whose 

Lofty  ridge  veils  thee  from 

My  sight,  0 Amo,  my  beloved, 

Leave  me,  that  my  eyes 

May  grieve,  and  that 

They  may  unceasingly  mourn, 

For  soon  must  I descend 

To  the  dark  shore — 

To  my  beloved,  who  has  gone  be- 
fore. 


Since  their  acquaintance  with  Europeans,  it  is  interesting 
to  notice  the  changes  which  are  constantly  taking  place  in 
the  language,  and  the  facility  with  which  they  naturalize  not 
only  English  words,  but  even  whole  sentences.  The  follow- 
ing song  contains  an  instance  of  it  : — 


Ra  marama,  ka  mahuta, 

I te  pae  na  rnnga  mai  koe, 
Ko  an  hei  raro  nei, 

Tiro  noa  atu  ai,  ki  wahoki, 

I te  moana,  he  pw'ega  poti 
mai, 

Nan,  e Tapora,  e ahn  ana 
I a te  tai  ki,  i Nga  motu, 

Ko  an  te  eke  atu  te  tera,  o 
waho, 

Mokai  tanpiri  nana  i arai  mai 
te  kite  atna  an, 

Te  waki  a Pehi  toro  mai  to 
ringa, 

Hari  ru  taua,  wara  i vara  tai 
ki  ha. 


There  the  moon  appears 
From  the  range  above  yon, 
Whilst  I remain  below, 

Looking  in  vain  for  your  return. 
From  thee  I hear  a pulling  of  the 
boat  towards  me, 

Thine,  0 Tap  sail,*  approaches 
From  the  sea,  from  Nga  motu, 

The  sprit-stwZ  is  not  seen  by  me, 
For  the  slave  Tanpiri  shades 
It  from  the  view,  but  my  heart 
Confesses  it  is  Pehi. 

Stretch  out  your  hand,  how  do 
you  do,  very  well  I thank  you. 


One  peculiarity  in  their  songs  is  the  cutting  short  different 
words  to  avoid  harshness,  and  adding  syllables  for  euphony. 


* Tapsall  was  a Swede,  and  the  first  European  legally  married  to  a Maori 
woman  by  Rev.  .Samuel  Marsden  ; he  was  a consistent  character,  and  greatly 
respected  by  both  races. 


MOTTOES. 


315 


Mottoes. 

Every  tribe  has  its  Motto,  some  of  which  may,  perhaps, 
be  regarded  as  war  cries,  others  as  terms  of  reproach. 

Some  are  given  them  by  other  tribes,  such  are  generally 
scornful  ones  : — 

1.  Waikato  lioehoe  ivaka  nukenuke. — Waikato  paddles  are  crooked. 
A simile  drawn  from  their  shape,  which  unlike  others,  are  crooked, 
this  is  applied  by  their  enemies  to  their  general  character,  as  being 
deceitful. 

2.  Waikato  taniwa  rau. — Waikato  has  its  hundred  taniwas,  which 
signifies,  that  it  has  its  hundred  great  and  powerful  chiefs ; a great 
man  being  called  “ he  ika,”  a fish,  or  “ he  taniwa,”  a crocodile. 

3.  Te  wai  nui  a Tarawera. — The  great  water  of  Tarawera  is  a 
name  to  express  the  number  and  power  of  the  Wanganui  natives. 

4.  Te  koura  puta  roa. — A simile  drawn  from  the  Cray  fish, 
which,  though  the  legs  may  be  pulled  off,  escapes  amongst  the 
stones;  so  the  Wanganui  natives  cannot  be  taken. 

5.  Nga  keri  keringa  a Ruauoko. — The  digging  of  Ruauoko.*  Ru 
is  the  father  of  rivers  ; it  is  an  exclamation  of  admiration  for  the 
Wanganui  river,  and  its  perpendicular  cliffs. 

6.  Mo  tai  tangata  ran. — A saying  for  the  number  and  power  of 
the  Nga  ti  rau  kawa. 

7.  Nga  ti  awa  te  toki,  te  tanga  tanga  i te  ra. — The  Nga  ti  awa, 
the  toki  which  does  not  move  about  in  its  socket.  The  fastening  or 
tying  of  the  hatchet,  which  cannot  be  loosened  by  the  heat  of  the 
sun : to  show  that  no  attacks  could  weaken  them. 

8.  Te  lcaraka  i ruia  mai  i runga  0 Rangi-atea. — The  karaka, 
which  was  sown  on  Rangiatea,  a mountain  of  Hawaiki,  too  great 
to  be  overlooked. 

9.  E kore  Taranaki  e ngaro  he  haraheke  to  ngae  nui , no  roto  no 
W aiwiri. — Taranaki  cannot  be  destroyed  ; flax  is  its  forest  inland 
to  Waiwiri,  that  plant  being  there  so  abundant  as  to  supply  all 
their  wants. 

10.  Rangi  tiki  te  upoko,  ivaka  herehere. — The  top-knot  of  heaven 
encircles  its  head.  A motto  for  Rotorua. 

11.  Nga  ti  Maru  koliao  rau. — Nga  ti  Maru  is  like  a hundred  eel 
holes,  referring  to  the  many  little  scattered  divisions  of  this  tribe. 

t This  name  implies  that  the  river  was  a volcanic  fissure,  Ru  being  the  word 
for  earthquake. 


316 


MOTTOES. 


12.  Waikato  horo  pounamu . — A bluff  at  the  Waikato  heads, 
where  many  canoes  have  been  lost,  and  ehiefs  drowned ; hence 
applied  to  Waikato,  as  a chief- destroying  tribe. 

13.  Nga  ti  paoa  taringa  ralii  rahi. — Nga  ti  paoa  have  thin  ears, 
or  sensitive  ones  ; they  cannot  brook  an  insult. 

14.  Puhi  taniwa  ran. — A saying  for  the  Nga  puhi,  similar  to 
that  for  Waikato. 

15.  Nga  puhi  o te  arawa. — The  bunches  of  the  pigeon’s  feathers 
of  the  arawa.  The  Nga  puhi  are  very  indignant  at  this  saying,  as 
the  arawa  had  a bad  character. 


HE  KOAUAU,  OR  MUSICAL  PIPE,  MADE  OUT  OF  A WHALE’S  TOOTH. 


(i) 


(i)  TATTOOED  HEAD,  CARVED  BY  HONGI.  (2)  THE  TATTOO  OF  A WOMAN’S  CHIN. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS. 

In  every  age  and  nation,  men  have  been  dissatisfied  with 
their  natural  appearance,  and  have  adopted  various  ways  of 
improving  it,  which  implies  a general  conviction  of  natural 
deficiency,  and  this  runs  through  all  grades  of  society. 
When  a greater  impression  was  to  be  made,  man  did  not 
trust  to  his  natural  countenance,  but  called  in  the  aid  of 
various  adjuncts.  To  give  the  Bishop  the  venerable  look 
becoming  his  high  and  sacred  office,  a wig,  almost  as  large 
and  white  as  the  fleece  of  a lamb,  was  deemed  requisite ; 
this  strange  idea,  however,  has  passed  away ; the  good  sense 
of  the  age  caused  it  to  be  laid  aside  at  the  proper  time, 
had  it  been  longer  persisted  in,  it  would  have  excited  ridicule 
rather  than  reverence.  The  bar  has  not  profited  by  the  good 


318 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS. 


example  of  tlie  cliurcli ; both  judge  and  barrister  cling  to  the 
wig;  and  we  still  see  the  youthful  face  surrounded  by  this 
imitation  of  venerable  age.  But  even  this  is  not  thought 
sufficient;  the  Judge,  when  called  upon  to  pronounce  sen- 
tence of  death  on  a fellow-creature,  summons  additional 
aid  to  give  him,  in  that  affecting  moment;  a more  than  usual 
amount  of  solemnity ; the  firm  look  of  inexorable  justice  is 
not  thought  sufficient  to  convey  to  the  convicted  felon  a 
proper  sense  of  his  inevitable  doom  ; the  Judge;  therefore; 
assumes  a black  cap  to  increase  the  effect. 

It  is  not  many  years  since  it  was  the  fashion  for  both  young 
and  old  to  wear  white  powder  on  the  head ; this  custom  found 
general  favor;  even  amongst  the  ladies;  as  imparting  a very 
aristocratic  look  to  the  wearer,  and  additional  beauty  to  their 
fair  locks  ; the  very  children  themselves,  in  polite  circles,  thus 
appeared. 

The  custom  also  of  plastering  up  the  hair  with  pomatum, 
contrary  to  its  grain,  to  give  increased  elevation  and  dignity 
to  its  fair  wearer ; and  that  of  the  gentleman,  with  his  queue 
or  pigtail,  mark,  not  only  the  age,  but  the  feeling,  that  the 
natural  dignity  of  the  human  head  required  artificial  aid  to 
improve  it,  and  the  savage  agreed  with  his  civilized  brother ; 
now  that  the  custom  has  passed  away  we  can  see  its  ab- 
surdity. The  New  Zealanders  have  not  been  behind  the 
rest  of  the  family  of  man  in  these  particulars ; they  gave  the 
preference  to  a red  color,  and  plentifully  anointed  their  heads 
with  a mixture  of  ochre  and  oil,  which  certainly  imparted  to 
them  a very  remarkable  look,  the  skull  appearing  as  though 
cleft,  and  streaming  down  with  gore.  The  general  effect 
was  heightened  by  a large  tuft  of  albatross  down,  which  was 
stuck  in  the  lobe  of  each  ear,  and  formed  a fine  contrast  to 
the  bright  red ; in  former  times,  the  chief  ladies  and  gen- 
tlemen had  their  entire  persons  thus  anointed,  or  painted ; 
this  was  considered  both  ornamental  and  useful,  rendering 
the  limbs  more  supple,  and  the  skin  less  sensible  to  cold, 
or  mosquito  bites. 

Wigs  were  not  worn,  although  a bald  head,  he  jpakira , 
was  considered  a reproach  ; I once  recollect  seeing  the 


MOKO,  OR  TATTOO. 


319 


head  chief  of  Taupo  with  an  English  wig,  made  of  light 
brown  hair ; this  was  worn  over  his  own  raven  locks,  which 
descended  on  every  side  full  half  a foot  below  the  artificial 
covering,  and  gave  him  a most  extraordinary  appearance, 
heightened  by  his  total  unconsciousness  of  the  ludicrous 
figure  he  was  making. 

Ear  ornaments,  are,  of  course,  in  general  use,  as  they  are 
about  the  last  remains  of  heathenism  which  will  be  given  up 
by  the  fair  sex  ; in  New  Zealand  they  are  worn  by  both 
sexes,  and  are  of  great  variety ; those  of  green  stone  are 
most  highly  prized,  sharks’  teeth,  if  of  large  size,  are,  if  pos- 
sible, still  more  so ; but  the  natives  are  not  very  particular  ; 
the  ring  of  a musket,  a little  roll  made  of  a leather  strap,  or 
even  of  paper,  may  frequently  be  seen  in  the  ears  of  the 
most  distinguished  individuals,  and  many  wear  the  skins 
of  the  Huia  or  Tui  birds  stuck  in  them  ; the  neck  orna- 
ment is  generally  of  green  stone,  wrought  into  the  form 
of  a human  figure,  and  called  hei  tiki ; the  hair  of  a 
chief's  head  is  tied  up  in  a knot,  with  one  or  more  feathers 
stuck  in  it ; the  favorite  ones  are  those  of  the  Huia,  which 
are  velvety  black,  tipped  with  white,  and  are  certainly  very 
beautiful ; but  the  grand  ornament  of  all  was  the  moko,  or 
tattoo ; this  was  in  general  use,  all  ranks  adopted  it ; a 
papatea,  or  plain  face,  was  a term  of  reproach ; some  were 
more  fully  tattooed  than  others,  but  all  more  or  less  so ; 
the  great  chiefs  had  their  faces  and  thighs  entirely  covered 
with  this  ornamental  renting  of  the  skin  ; the  ladies  had 
their  lips  and  chins  operated  upon,  with  a little  curl  at  the 
corner  of  the  eye ; frequently  their  persons  also  were  covered 
with  small  strokes  of  tattooing,  these  might  be  called  beauty 
patches,  such  as  those  made  of  a bit  of  court  plaster,  which 
were  once  thought  highly  ornamental. 

To  set  off  the  moko  to  advantage,  it  was  necessary  to  give 
up  the  beard,  which  was  not  considered  in  the  light  of  an 
ornament ; in  former  days,  a pair  of  mussel  shells  were 
employed,  but  since  their  acquaintance  with  Europeans, 
large  tweezers  have  taken  their  place,  these  are  an  inch  and 
a half  wide,  and  three  or  four  long,  and  were  generally  seen 


320 


MOKO,  OR  TATTOO. 


hanging  from  the  garment  or  neck  ; and  whenever  the  gen- 
tleman could  find  no  other  employ ment,  he  indefatigably 
occupied  himself  with  them.  To  allow  the  heard  to  grow,, 
was  regarded  as  a sign  of  old  age,  and  proof  that  the  wearer 
had  ceased  to  care  for  his  appearance ; a person  with  a 
beard  was  addressed  as  e weki , which  is  a salutation  equiva- 
lent to,  old  man,  but  this  is  no  longer  the  case ; since  the 
tattoo  was  given  up,  the  beard  has  been  adopted  in  its 
place,  and  that  of  the  natives  rivals  the  most  luxuriant  one 
of  the  Europeans. 

Before  they  went  to  fight,  the  youth  were  accustomed  to 
mark  their  countenance  with  charcoal  in  different  lines,  and 
their  traditions  state,  that  this  was  the  beginning  of  the 
tattoo,  for  their  wars  became  so  continuous,  that  to  save  the 
trouble  of  thus  constantly  painting  the  face,  they  made  the 
lines  permanent  by  the  moko ; it  is  however  a question 
whether  it  did  not  arise  from  a different  cause ; formerly 
the  grand  mass  of  men  who  went  to  fight  were  the  black 
slaves,  and  when  they  fought  side  by  side  with  their  lighter 
colored  masters,  the  latter  on  those  occasions  used  char- 
coal to  make  it  appear  they  were  all  one.  The  substance 
generally  used  as  coloring  matter  is  the  resin  of  the 
kauri  or  rimu}  which,  when  burnt,  is  pounded,  and  con- 
verted into  a fine  powder ; at  Taupo,  I went  to  see  the 
place  where  this  pigment  was  manufactured.  A narrow 
pit  was  sunk  at  a little  distance  from  a precipice,  and  from 
the  face  of  the  cliff  a passage  was  cut  to  the  bottom  of  it, 
over  the  mouth  of  which  pieces  of  wood  containing  the 
resin  were  burnt,  and  the  residuum  falling  within  it,  was 
taken  away. 

The  uhi  or  instrument  used  was  a small  chisel,  made  of 
the  bone  of  an  albatross,  very  narrow  and  sharp,  which  was 
driven  by  means  of  a little  mallet,  he  mahoe , quite  through 
the  skin,  and  sometimes  completely  through  the  cheek  as  well, 
in  which  case  when  the  person  undergoing  the  operation  took 
his  pipe,  the  smoke  found  its  way  out  through  the  cuttings  ; 
the  pain  was  excruciating,  especially  in  the  more  tender 
parts,  and  caused  dreadful  swellings,  only  a small  piece 


MOKO,  OE  TATTOO. 


821 


could  be  done  at  a time;  the  operator  held  in  his  hand  a 
piece  of  m,nka,  flax,  dipped  in  the  pigment,  which  he  drew 
oyer  the  incision  immediately,  it  was  made;  the  blood 
which  flowed  freely  from  the  wound  was  constantly  wiped 
away  with  a bit  of  flax ; the  pattern  was  first  drawn  either 
with  charcoal  or  scratched  in  with  a sharp-pointed  instru- 
ment. To  tattoo  a person  fully  was  therefore  a work  of 
time,  and  to  attempt  to  do  too  much  at  once  endangered 
life ; I remember  a poor  porangi,  or  insane  person,  who, 
during  the  war,  ’was  tattooed  most  unmercifully  by  some 
young  scoundrels;  the  poor  man's  wounds  were  so  dread- 
fully inflamed,  as  to  occasion  his  death  ; whilst  any  one 
was  being  operated  upon,  all  persons  in  the  pa  were 
tapu,  until  the  termination  of  the  work,  lest  any  evil 
should  befal  him ; to  have  fine  tattooed  faces,  was  the 
great  ambition  of  young  men,  both  to  render  themselves 
attractive  to  the  ladies,  and  conspicuous  in  war  : for  even  if 
killed  by  the  enemy,  whilst  the  heads  of  the  untattooed  were 
treated  with  indignity,  and  kicked  on  one  side,  those  which 
were  conspicuous  by  their  beautiful  moko,  were  carefully  cut 
off,  stuck  on  the  turuturu,  a pole  with  a cross  on  it,  and  then 
preserved ; all  which  was  highly  gratifying  to  the  survivors, 
and  the  spirits  of  their  late  possessors. 

The  person  operated  upon  was  stretched  all  his  length  on 
the  ground,  and  to  encourage  him  manfully  to  endure  the 
pain,  songs  were  continually  sung  to  him.  On  such  occa- 
sions the  ladies  sang  to  strengthen  the  sufferer  in  bearing 
the  excruciating  operation,  that  he  might  also  be  ashamed  of 
their  seeing  him  faint  under  it  in  their  presence  : — 


E noho  ana  e kai  tahi  ana 
Ki  te  titiro  ki  nga  rewha 

I te  ihu  o Tutetawha. 

E wekoki  ana  me  he  peke 
ngarara  taiamai  raki  te  uhi 
a Mataora 

Taria  e tuku  atn, 


We  are  sitting  eating  together. 

We  are  viewing  the  prints  on  the 
eyebrows 

And  nose  of  Tutetawha. 

They  are  crooked  as  a lizard’s 
leg. 

Tatoo  him  with  the  point  of  Ma- 
taora. 

Be  not  impatient  to  go 


Y 


322 


MOKO,  OR  TATTOO. 


Ki  to  wahine  takiri  karito 
kowhara. 

Naku  koe  i whakanako 
Te  tangata  i te  whakautu 
Kia  ata  whakanakonako ; 
Tangata  i te  whakautu  kore, 
Kakoia  kia  tatahi. 

Patua  i te  whakatangitangi 
E hiki  Tangaroa, 

E hiki  Tangaroa. 


To  the  girl  who  gathers  you  sweet 
greens 

In  baskets  of  Kowhara. 

Let  every  line  be  traced. 

On  the  man  that  has  the  atu, 

Let  the  figures  be  handsome  ; 

On  the  man  that  has  no  atu , 
Make  it  crooked,  leave  it  open. 
Let  our  songs  lull  the  pain, 

And  inspire  thee  with  fortitude. 

0 Hiki  Tangaroa.  0 Hiki,  &c. 


He  tangata  i te  wakautu, 

Ki  ata  wakanakonako, 

He  tangata  wakautu  kore, 
Kumekumea  kia  tatahi, 

E hiki  Tangaroa, 

E hiki  Tangaroa. 
Patua  kite  waka  tangitangi, 

E hiki  Tangaroa  hai, 
Tangata  te  kitea, 

Te  waihanga  patua, 

Ki  te  wakatangi  tangi, 

E hiki  Tangaroa  hai. 


He  who  pays  well,  let  him  be 
beautifully  ornamented  ; 

But  he  who  forgets  the  operator, 
let  him  be  done  carelessly. 

Be  the  lines  wide  apart. 

0 hiki  Tangaroa, 

0 hiki  Tangaroa. 

Strike,  that  the  chisel  as  At  cuts 
along  may  sound. 

0 hiki  Tangaroa. 

Men  do  not  know  the  skill  of  the 
operator  in  driving  his  sound- 
ing chisel  along. 

0 hiki  Tangaroa. 


This  song  was  chiefly  to  remind  the  gentleman  of  the  duty 
he  owed  to  the  operator,  who,  not  having  any  regular.pro- 
fessional  charges,  chiefly  depended  on  the  liberality  of  his 
patient,  who  was  expected  not  only  to  feed  him  with  the 
best,  but  to  make  him  a very  handsome  present  as  well. 
When  the  operator  suspected  that  he  should  not  be  re- 
membered, he  frequently  became  careless  in  his  work, 
and  rendered  the  person  an  object  for  life;  some  of  the 
mokos  are  very  coarsely  done,  whilst  others  are  finished 
with  an  artist's  touch,  by  which  we  may  judge  the  way  they 
severally  paid  the  owner  of  the  sounding  chisel. 


MOKO,  OR  TATTOO. 


323 


Whilst  the  males  had  every  part  of  the  face  tattooed,  and 
the  thighs  as  well,  the  females  had  chiefly  the  chin  and  the 
lips,  although  occasionally  they  also  had  their  thighs  and 
breasts,  with  a few  smaller  marks  on  different  parts  of  the 
body  as  well.  There  were  regular  rules  for  tattooing,  and  the 
artist  always  went  systematically  to  work,  beginning  at  one 
spot  and  gradually  proceeding  to  another,  each  particular 
part  having  its  distinguishing  name.  Thus,  they  commenced 
with — 

1.  Te  kaive,  which  are  four  lines  on  each  side  of  the  chin. 

2.  Te  pukawcie,  six  lines  on  the  chin. 

3.  Nga  rere  hupe,  the  lines  below  the  nostrils,  six  in  number. 

4.  Nga  kokiri,  a curved  line  on  the  cheek  bone. 

5.  Nga  koroaha,  lines  between  the  cheek  bone  and  ear. 

6.  Nga  wakarakau,  lines  below  the  former. 

7.  Nga  pongiangia , the  lines  on  each  side  of  the  lower  extremity 

of  the  nose. 

8.  Nga  pae  tarewa,  the  lines  on  the  cheek  bone. 

9.  Nga  rerepi,  and  Nga  ngatareiva,  lines  on  the  bridge  of  the  nose. 

10.  Nga  tiivana,  four  lines  on  the  forehead. 

11.  Nga  rewha,  three  lines  below  the  eyebrows. 

12.  Nga  titi,  lines  on  the  centre  of  the  forehead. 

13.  Tpu  rangi,  lines  above  the  former. 

14.  Te  tonokai,*  the  general  names  for  the  lines  on  the  forehead. 

15.  He  ngutu  pu  rua,  both  lips  tattooed. 

16.  Te  rape , the  higher  part  of  the  thighs. 

17.  Te  paki  paki,  the  tattooing  on  the  seat. 

18.  Te  paki  turi,  the  lower  thigh. 

19.  Nga  tata,  the  adjoining  part. 

The  following  are  female  tattoos  : — 

1.  Taki  taki , lines  from  the  breast  to  the  navel. 

2.  Hope  hope , the  lines  on  the  thighs. 

3.  Waka  te  lie , the  lines  on  the  chin. 


* The  name  derived  from  the  movement  made  when  a person  assents  that 
he  wants  food  cooking  for  him,  by  raising  the  eyebrows. 


324 


EMBALMING. 


Embalming. 

Connected  with  tattooing,  was  the  art  of  embalming.  This 
was  done  in  order  that  great  warriors  might  show  the  heads 
of  all  the  distinguished  chiefs  they  had  killed  ; but  this  art 
was  not  employed  for  that  purpose  alone  ; it  enabled  them  to 
preserve  the  heads  of  those  who  were  dear  to  them,  and  to 
keep  these  remembrances  of  beloved  objects  ever  near ; it 
was  no  uncommon  thing  to  embalm  in  this  way  the  head  of 
a beloved  wife  or  child. 

To  prepare  them  for  drying  was  called  jpaki  jpaki,  or 
popo,  which  signifies  taking  out  the  brain  ; they  were  then 
subjected  to  repeated  steamings  in  the  oven ; after  each 
steaming,  the  heads  were  carefully  wiped  with  the  flowers  of 
the  kakaho,  or  reed,  and  every  portion  of  flesh  and  brain  was 
removed ; a small  thin  manuka  stick  was  inserted  between  the 
skin  and  bone  of  the  nose  to  preserve  its  form  ; when  this 
process  was  ended,  they  were  dried  in  the  sun,  and  after- 
wards exposed  to  the  smoke  of  their  houses  ; one  of  the  first 
things  was  to  extract  the  eyes,  fill  the  sockets  with  flax, 
and  then  sew  the  lids  together.  These  heads,  thus  pre- 
pared, seemed  to  be  exempt  from  the  attack  of  insects,  being 
thoroughly  impregnated  with  pyroligneous  acid.  In  former 
days  the  preparation  of  heads  was  very  general;  they  were 
done  for  sale  to  the  Europeans,  and  so  great  was  the  demand, 
that  many  a murderous  attack  has  been  made  solely  to  ob- 
tain heads  for  the  market ; and  those  who  were  the  most 
finely  tattooed,  were  chiefly  sought  for  ; how  many  of  the 
sins  of  those  savage  islanders  have  been  participated  in  by 
Europeans  ! Eew  are  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  this 
abominable  traffic  was  carried,  but  it  has  now  totally  ceased. 
I have  been  assured,  that  not  a few  of  the  heads  thus 
preserved  were  those  of  Europeans,  and  some  of  them  of  the 
very  individuals  who  came  to  purchase  such  things  for  the 
European  market. 

If  the  person  whose  head  was  to  be  embalmed  had  relatives 
in  the  place,  the  operators  removed  to  some  distance  from  it, 
and  neither  they  nor  the  relations  were  allowed  to  touch  food 


NAMES. 


325 


until  it  was  cured,  they  were  tapu,  for  if  the  process  were 
witnessed  by  the  friends  of  the  dead,  they  would  be  unable 
to  repress  their  tears,  and  the  head  would  be  spoiled ; but 
if  it  were  only  of  an  enemy,  the  operation  was  openly  per- 
formed. 

The  preserved  heads  of  relatives  were  kept  in  baskets, 
carefully  made  and  scented  with  oil ; when  brought  out  to 
be  cried  over,  they  were  ornamented  with  feathers  and 
placed  in  some  conspicuous  place. 

Names. 

Native  names  have  always  a signification,  and  are  never 
given  at  random  ; those  of  chiefs,  are  selected  with  much 
thought,  from  the  waJca  paparanga , or  genealogical  tables 
of  their  ancestors,  for  none  can  exceed  the  natives  in  their 
pride  of  descent.  Their  genealogical  tree  is  compared  to 
the  hue , calabash,  the  main  shoot  or  stem  of  which  is  called 
the  tahuhuj  and  the  branches  kawae.  Very  little  is  thought 
of  a chief  who  cannot  count  back  some  twenty  or  thirty 
generations,  and  the  high  families  carry  their's  even  to 
the  beginning  of  all  things.  I once  obtained  a pedigree  of 
this  kind,  beginning  with  na  te  hore  i ai,  from  the  nothing 
the  something,  which  went  on  gradually  introducing  name 
after  name,  and  at  last  terminating  with  that  of  the  speaker. 
The  Tupunas  and  Arikis  carefully  taught  their  children  the 
names  of  their  ancestors,  and  to  aid  them  in  this  work,  each 
family  had  a curious  carved  board,  called  he  waka  paparanga 
rakau.  This  was  made  something  like  a saw,  each  tooth 
representing  a name ; and  here  and  there  where  a tooth  was 
wanting,  it  implied  that  the  male  line  had  failed,  and  been 
continued  in  that  of  a female. 

It  is  considered  rude  to  ask  a chief  his  name,  as  it  implies 
that  he  is  a person  of  no  consequence,  from  his  not  being 
known.  A person  speaking  ironically  of  another,  who  thinks 
much  of  his  dignity,  says,  0 yes,  he  is  a great  chief  indeed ; 
wherever  he  goes,  they  enquire,  who  is  he  V ' The  polite  way 
of  apologizing  for  a person's  ignorance  of  another's  name,  is 


326 


NAMES. 


to  say,  “ Ka  pa  tan  i kai  ahau  i te  umu  o to  tapanga.”  If  I 
had  partaken  of  the  feast  given  when  you  were  named,  then 
indeed  I should  have  known  you. 

A chief  generally  receives  three  names  during  his  life  : the 
first,  immediately  after  birth,  is  given  by  his  mother,  and 
might  be  called  a child’s  name,  such  as  Tangi  kai , from  the 
child  crying  for  food ; Vodka,  pig,  from  its  greediness ; Mokai, 
pet ; Moe  one,  a little  lively  grub  ; Mouri,  heart’s  blood ; *&c. 
The  next  was  given  at  the  tuatanga,  or  naming,  being  that  of 
some  ancestor,  and  was  assumed  as  he  grew  up  ; the  last  was 
taken  at  the  death  of  his  father,  which  might  be  called  the 
family  name ; when  Pehi  died,  Pakoro  his  son  took  it ; and 
Te  Hiko,  the  second  son,  assumed  his  father’s  second  name, 
Turoa.  So  also  when  Te  Heuheu  died,  his  younger  brother, 
Iwikau,  adopted  his  name.  Frequently,  however,  names  were 
acquired  by  something  occurring  to  the  individual ; the  head 
chief  of  the  Karawa  obtained  the  name  of  Panakareao,  from 
his  being  entangled  amongst  the  supple  jacks  in  the  forest, 
whilst  fleeing  from  the  battle-field  where  his  men  were 
routed;  in  that  state,  he  was  captured  by  a woman,  and 
honorably  restored  to  liberty,  with  this  name,  which  he  ever 
afterwards  bore ; Tumuwakairia , a principal  chief  of  the 
Mani-a-poto,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  threatened  with  being 
hung  from  the  tumu , or  knot  of  a tree,  but  being  rescued  by 
another  chief  from  the  fate  intended  him,  he  hence  acquired 
his  present  name,  which  signifies,  suspended  from  the  knot 
of  a tree. 

Te  Wakaahu,  a Wanganui  chief,  slew  Tuwhare,  a head 
chief  of  the  Ngatiwhatua  from  Kaipara ; he  was  not  killed 
at  once,  but  lingered  some  time,  the  dying  chief  told  his 
conqueror  he  was  no  warrior,  but  only  a husbandman ; that 
he  had  not  the  hand  of  a man  accustomed  to  fight,  but  on^r 
he  ring  a ring  a mahi  kai , a hand  accustomed  to  work,  or  he 
would  have  killed  him  outright ; his  conqueror  ever  after 
retained  that  as  his  name,  and  his  son  after  him.  The  great 
Waikato  chief  Te  Waharoa,  obtained  his  name  from  his 
father  being  killed  in  the  gateway  of  the  pa  he  was  attacking. 

Rau  par  aha,  the  edible  leaf  of  the  convolvolus,  was  a name 


NAMES. 


327 


given  to  that  chief  by  his  father's  murderer,  who  said,  if  he 
caught  him  he  would  be  a relish  for  that  vegetable. 

Huia,  the  daughter  of  Pomare,  gave  her  infant  the  name 
of  Kota,  north  star,  the  vessel  on  board  of  which  Pomare  was 
kept  as  a prisoner,  in  defiance  of  a flag  of  truce.  The  widow 
of  Matene  Puta,  who  was  taken  prisoner  at  Porirua,  during* 
the  late  war,  and  cruelly  hung,  to  commemorate  the  event, 
called  her  infant,  which  was  born  after  its  father’s  death, 
Repeka , the  hung. 

Some  derived  their  names  from  their  occupations ; Rua 
kiri  kiri , gravel  pit,  was  the  name  of  a slave,  chiefly  em- 
ployed in  digging  and  carrying  gravel  to  the  kumara  and 
taro  grounds,  which  are  so  covered,  nearly  a foot  deep, 
in  order  to  obtain  better  crops.  Names  are  occasionally 
taken  in  defiance,  although  originally  given  by  way  of 
reproach,  or  as  a curse  ; thus,  when  a woman  made  a 
song  on  Poto,  a great  chief,  and  said,  “ Taku  kuru  kanga 
ko  koe  e Pcfto,  te  kai  mo  roto  ko  te  Rangi  wakarurua ” 
which  is,  literally,  You  are  the  pounder  of  my  rotten  corn, 
0 Poto ; the  food  for  my  stomach  is  Rangi  wakarurua, 
your  father ; this  was  a great  curse,  and  to  show  his  indig- 
nant defiance,  Poto  took  the  name,  Kuru  Kanga , and  his 
friend  Taui,  who  was  his  relative,  to  show  his  entire  sym- 
pathy with  him,  also  took  as  his  name  Te  kai  o roto.  Hori 
Patene’s  first  name  was  Taui,  but  afterwards  this  became 
his  surname. 

Chiefs  frequently  acquired  names  from  their  peculiar  way 
of  fighting;  Mawa/L,  a creeping  plant  like  the  cucumber, 
which  climbs  over  the  fortifications  of  a pa,  is  a name  given 
its  original  bearer,  to  commemorate  his  crafty  way  of  sur- 
prising pas ; Heuheu  implies  that  the  chief  suddenly  came 
upon  his  enemy  by  sculking  amongst  the  brush-wood ; 
Tinirau  signifies  the  warrior,  who  slew  many  hundreds  with 
his  own  hand.  Other  names  mark  the  lofty  pretensions  of 
their  owners ; Rangi-iri-hau  is  the  heaven  lifted  up  above 
the  wind  or  storm,  to  show  that  he  was  too  great  to  be 
moved  by  any  of  the  outbreaks  of  his  enemies ; Rangi  i 
rung  a , the  heaven  above,  one  of  the  ten  heavens,  is  a name 


328 


NAMES. 


for  a great  man ; Bangi  tauira , the  heavenly  pattern  ; Bangia 
hae  ata , the  first  ray  of  morning  ; Te  ihi,  the  sun-beam  ; Te 
Heuheu  was  overwhelmed,  with  nearly  sixty  of  his  tribe,  by 
a great  landslip,  his  surviving  son  assumed  the  name  of 
Uoronguku,  the  sliding  landslip  ; Hipango,  the  ray  darting 
through  the  blue  sky. 

Warekohuru  is  the  name  of  a child  whose  parent  was  mur- 
dered in  his  own  house  ; Marupo  and  Patupo , are  the  names 
of  midnight  murderers  ; Paerangi,  fair  sky,  is  the  name  of  a 
man  of  peace,  or  it  may  be  the  same  as  Paeroa,  the  long  pae, 
or  mountain  range,  to  express  his  high  pretensions;  Kau 
moana  and  Oe  waka  are  names  for  great  sailors;  when  a 
beloved  child  or  great  chief  dies,  the  last  thing  eaten  is  fre- 
quently taken  as  a name  by  some  surviving  member  of  the 
family ; thus,  the  name  of  Hararuta , arrow-root,  has  been 
assumed.  Some  names  appear  very  blasphemous,  such  as 
Puku  atua , God’s  belly  ; many  are  very  obscene.*  Taiariki, 
little  walking-stick,  is  a name  for  a short  person,* and  Taiaroa, 
a long  one,  for  a tall  gentleman,  the  taiaha  being  a chief’s 
staff. 

Everything  has  its  name ; their  houses,  canoes,  weapons, 
and  even  garments,  have  distinctive  appellations  given  them. 
Thus,  when  Hori  Kingi  built  a new  house,  he  named  it  Inga - 
rani , England,  to  show  his  friendship  for  our  country.  If 
the  natives  perceive  any  honor  attached  to  our  English  names, 
they  immediately  adopt  them ; they  have  thus  assumed  Kingi , 
for  king ; Kuini , for  queen  ; Kawana , governor ; Pihojpa , 
bishop  ; Kanara , colonel ; Kingi  Wiremu , King  William  ; 
Wikitoria  te  Kuini , Victoria  the  Queen. 

A chief  inquired  if  Earl  Grey  was  not  a higher  title  than 
Sir  G.  Grey,  and  when  told  it  was,  then,  said  he,  my  child 
shall  be  called  Earl  Grey,  C{  Takerei .”  Karnes  also  mark  the 
arrival  of  anything  new  in  the  country:  paura , powder; 
tu'para , double-barrelled  gun  ; hota,  shot ; yu,  a gun ; and 
<pu  nui , a big  gun  (cannon) ; pukera , bugler  ; kai  paura, 

* The  natives  formerly  went  naked,  and  did  not  think  there  was  anything 
indecent  in  doing  so,  in  the  same  way  they  spoke  naked,  using  most  obscene 
language  without  seeing  any  impropriety  in  it. 


NAMES. 


329 


powder  eater : these  are  names  showing  their  love  of  war. 
Others  mark  their  growing  attachment  for  domestic  com- 
forts,  and  a.  peaceful  life  :—Kai  Imka  is  sugar-eater ; nga  hiti, 
sheets  ; ti  kapa,  tea  cup ; ti  kera,  tea  kettle ; tipota,  teapot ; 
tupeka,  tobacco.  Nor  is  even  the  final  abode  of  man  lost 
sight  of : kawena,  coffin,  is  a favorite  appellation.  Names 
thus  chronicle  the  introduction  of  new  articles,  and  record 
any  striking  event;  it  was  in  1854  the  measles  made  their 
first  appearance  in  New  Zealand.  A child  was  brought 
for  baptism ; on  inquiring  its  native  name,  the  mother 
said  it  was  Mate  haere,  the  spreading  disease.  In  the  same 
way  a person  who  was  grateful  for  his  recovery  from  some 
dangerous  disease,  assumed  the  name  of  Tumahu,  the  con- 
valescent. 

Their  lands  and  roads  are  all  named ; so  also  the  sea 
beaches  round  the  islands ; their  horses,  cows,  and  pigs, 
even  their  trees,  especially  the  karaka ; rocks  and  fountains. 
Go  where  you  will,  in  the  midst  of  an  apparently  untrodden 
wilderness,  ask,  has  this  spot  a name  ? and  any  native  be- 
longing to  that  district  will  immediately  give  one. 

The  name  for  religion  is  Rakau  Tapu,  the  sacred  tree, 
intimating  that  their  most  ancient  form  of  worship  was  that 
of  the  tree  or  grove.  Tauira , an  example,  is  also  another 
term  for  it,  implying  that  religion  gives  a pattern  or  ex- 
ample of  the  way  men  should  live.  Waka  pakoko , an  idol, 
meaning  to  cause  to  be  dried  up  or  fruitless. 

The  name  given  to  Europeans  in  most  parts  of  Polynesia 
is  Papalangi.  Papa  signifies  a level  or  flat  surface,  indi- 
cating the  first  idea  of  the  white  man  to  have  been  that  he 
came  from  one  of  the  ten  heavens,  which  were  supposed  to 
be  formed  much  the  same  as  the  earth.  In  New  Zealand  the 
European  is  called  Pakeha.  Kea  in  Hawaiki  or  the  Sand- 
wich Isles  is  the  obsolete  term  for  white,  and  there  also  is 
applied  to  white  people,  in  New  Zealand  it  would  be  Keha , 
which  is  likewise  a name  given  to  them,  e te  Keha  !.  is  an 
expression  of  admiration  for  his  superior  knowledge.  O the 
white  man  ! (how  clever).  Pakeha  may  also  imply  that  he 
comes  from  a strange  or  foreign  pa  which  is  very  far  off. 


330 


NAMES. 


Pakeha  is  likewise  a name  for  the  west  wind ; and  it  is 
not  improbable,  as  the  Europeans  always  arrived  from  the 
west  that  they  acquired  the  name  from  the  wind  which 
chiefly  brought  them.  Poke  ha  means  a favorable  breath  or 
breeze.  The  Europeans  are  termed,  Wai  tai , salt  water, 
whilst  the  Maori  are  Wai  Mauri,  fresh  water.  There  are 
other  names  given  them  as  well,  such  as  piha,  iron,  poroteke, 
pora , mad  drunken,  and  such  like. 

In  the  Sandwich  Isles  a ship  is  called  he  motu , an  island, 
from  its  vast  size  when  compared  with  their  canoes.  The 
first  impression  formed  upon  the  mind  of  the  Maori  when  he 
saw  a ship  was,  that  it  was  a flying  god,  which  they  attempted 
to  kill  or  overcome  by  their  potent  spells.  Afterwards  when 
they  were  permitted  to  go  on  board  and  behold  the  im- 
mense quantity  of  provisions  it  contained,  their  admiration 
, was  so  great,  they  exclaimed,  He  kai  puke  ! a hill  of  food, 
and  that  is  still  their  name  for  ships. 

The  first  thing  that  Adam  is  recorded  to  have  done  was 
the  naming  of  the  different  creatures  which  the  Almighty  had 
made.  What  a prominence  does  this  his  first  recorded  act 
give  to  the  importance  of  names  ! by  them  one  creature  is  dis- 
tinguished from  another ; individuality  is  thereby  secured, 
each  is  taken  separately  out  of  the  grand  bundle  of  life,  and 
severally  specified  by  name  ; Adam  and  Eve  thus  had  names 
bestowed  by  their  Creator  himself,  and  we  are  assured  this 
will  be  continued  in  a future  state  as  well.  But  Adam’s 
work  showed  the  difference  made  between  man  and  other 
creatures,  he  only  named  their  grand  families  to  separate 
one  species  from  another,  but  he  distinguished  each  of  his 
own  children  by  name,  and  thus  this  primaeval  practice  has 
been  continued  without  exception  by  every  section  of  the 
family  of  man,  however  rude  and  degraded,  each  individual 
bearing  his  own  peculiar  name ; and  in  this  also  we  trace  the 
unity  and  identity  of  our  race.  This  subject  might  be  car- 
ried much  further.  The  poor  despised  Australian  has  not 
only  his  own  particular  name  but  several  others  by  which 
his  tribe,  family,  and  distinguishing  characteristic  may  be 
known ; he  has  also  names  for  the  various  degrees  of  relation- 


DEGREES  OE  CONSANGUINITY. 


331 


ship,  as  well  as  the  most  enlightened  sections  of  the  human 
family ; and  many  of  the  degraded  races  have  actually 
more  names  to  define  those  relations  than  we  ourselves  ; nay, 
further,  he  has  a classification  of  animals,  birds,  and  plants, 
which  mark  the  exercise  of  mind  as  well  as  observation. 

The  following  is  a list  of  some  of  the  Maori  names  of  rela- 
tionship and  degrees  of  consanguinity  : — 

Degrees  of  Consanguinity. 

The  name  given  to  a husband  is  tahu , which  nearly  ap- 
proaches in  signification  to  that  of  husband  or  house-bond, 
tahu  signifying  the  ridge-pole  of  a house,  it  is  also  a fire- 
lighter, so  likewise  Tahu  ahi,  which  has  a similar  meaning,  is 
applied  to  the  wife  as  well  as  the  cook ; the  unmarried 
woman  is  a hine,  but  when  married  and  a mother  she  is  a 
wahine , a woman  who  carries  her  child  or  bears  a burthen ; 
she  is  also  called  he  hoa,  a friend,  this  applies  to  both  her  and 
the  husband  who  likewise  is  a tane}  which,  though  literally 
only  a man,  has  generally  the  other  signification  attached  to  it. 
The  first  or  head  wife  is  the  wahine  matua , or  mother  wife, 
the  others  te  muri  manu , the  birds  that  follow  in  the  order 
and  rank  they  are  taken  as  the  pune  rua , second  wife,  jpune 
torn,  third  wife,  and  so  on. 

The  first-born  is  the  matamua,  a muringa  is  a younger 
one,  and  the  youngest  the  potiki.  The  elder  child,  whether 
male  or  female,  is  a tuakana  to  all  who  are  younger  of  the 
same  family,  and  they  are  teinas  to  him  or  her ; thus  all 
younger  brothers  are  so  called  by  the  elder,  and  all  younger 
sisters  by  their  elder  one  ; the  same  with  the  younger  bro- 
thers or  sisters,  the  eldest  is  their  tuakana  ; in  a similar 
way  the  members  of  the  head  family  are  tuakanas  to  those  of 
lower  branches  of  the  same,  whilst  they  are  teinas  to  the  other. 
Properly  speaking  there  is  no  word  for  brothers  or  sisters ; 
amongst  the  brothers  all  are  either  elders  or  youngers.  So 
amongst  sisters.  But  if  a sister  speaks  of  her  brother  he  is  her 
tungane , and  if  a brother  speaks  of  his  sister  she  is  his  tuahine . 

The  father  in  a family  is  a matua  tane , the  mother  a matua 
icahine , she  is  also  called  wae}  ivaea , waene , waerere , and 


332 


DEGREES  OF  CONSANGUINITY. 


waereere ; and  the  father's  brothers  or  sisters,  uncle  or  aunt, 
as  well  as  the  mother's,  are  all  matua  kekes , or  parents  once 
removed,  and  each  can  claim  a child  of  the  former,  who  is 
brought  up  as  though  their  own,  whilst  the  kuia,  or  grand- 
mother, has  a prescriptive  right  to  the  potiki  of  the  family, 
who  inherits  her  property,  and  especially  all  the  spells  and 
charms  which  she  is  supposed  to  possess. 

A father  is  also  a pa  and  papa.  The  son  is  a tama  and 
tamaiti ; the  daughter  a tamahine;  the  grandchild  a mokopuna; 
the  daughter's  husband  a hunaonga,  so  also  the  son's  wife, 
and  to  them  the  father-in-law  or  mother-in-law  is  a hungawai 
or  poupou  ; the  mother-in-law  is  a hungarei ; a brother-in- 
law  a taokete ; a woman's  brother-in-law  an  autane , and  a 
man's  sister-in-law  an  auwahine.  A nephew  or  niece  is  an 
iramutu  ; a matua  oiawai  is  a foster-father,  matua  wangai  the 
father  of  an  adopted  child,  and  wangai  au  the  adopted  child. 
Tama  riki  is  plural  for  both  male  and  female  children,  and 
iamariki-tang a the  period  of  youth,  and  tai-tamariki  is  a 
young  man  or  youth.  Papa  ivaka  angi  a step-father,  tupuna 
grandfather  or  ancestor,  kurataJci  puni  is  also  an  ancestor; 
wai  wahine  the  wife  of  a younger  brother,  a sister-in-law  ; 
mahanga , twins.  Pa  heke  is  a grown-up  person,  so  also 
pa  keke.  Kaumatua  is  a middle-aged  man,  and  koroheke  an 
old  one,  so  also  nehe ; tai  koroheke  a very  old  man,  and 
tauheke,  ruwahine , and  ruahine , an  old  woman.  A deformed 
hump-backed  person  is  a ngunu.  There  are  several  names 
for  dwarfs,  as  takurua , pokohuri , potaka,  and  wheto.  A bald 
person  is  a pakira.  A takapau  or  takakau  is  a single  person ; 
takakore  a widower,  widow,  or  naked  person  ; a puhi  taumau , 
tamau , and  taurangi , are  all  terms  for  a betrothed  or  promised 
female  ; whai  aipo  a wife  or  companion,  whilst  a ivahine  wai 
aipo , is  a sister  of  a deceased  wife.  A pani  is  an  orphan, 
and  a panikoki  one  who  has  no  relation  left.  Iwi  is  a tribe, 
and  raue  and  hapu  a family.  Wanaunga  and  take  taunga 
kindred,  and  taunga  is  a native  of  any  particular  place  where 
his  forefathers  have  always  lived. 


THE  GRAVES  OF  MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA,  AND  THEIR  MURDERERS  ATTENDING 
A SERVICE  AT  THEM. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

DREAMS. 

The  natives  are  great  observers  of  Dreams,  which  were 
formerly  thought  to  be  sent  by  their  gods  to  advertize 
them  of  coming  events.  The  common  name  for  dreams  is 
moe  hewa,  or  moe  moea  ; but  if  they  are  long-continued  ones 
they  are  called  popopo  hewa.  A karakia,  called  uriuri,  liter- 
ally to  turn  round,  or  avert  the  fulfilment  of  bad  dreams,  was 
constantly  repeated  when  any  one  had  what  was  interpreted 
to  be  an  unlucky  one.  In  dreams  it  is  supposed  the  soul 
leaves  its  body  and  visits  the  Reinga,  where  it  holds  converse 
with  the  spirits  of  its  friends.  Every  dream  is  said  to  have 


334 


DREAMS. 


its  signifi cation , and  they  are  almost  as  skilled  in  interpreting 
them  as  Atemidorus  himself. 

If  a person  dreamed  of  a sick  relative,  and  imagined  he 
saw  him  in  a very  ghastly  squalid  state,  apparently  on  the 
point  of  death,  it  would  be  considered  a sign  of  his  speedy 
restoration  to  health ; but  if,  on  the  contrary,  he  appeared 
to  be  quite  well,  that  would  be  a sign  of  death.  To  dream 
of  seeing  the  dead,  is  a sign  of  death  to  the  living,  and 
of  seeing  the  living  a sign  of  good.  Manihera,  the  night 
before  he  was  murdered  at  Taupo,  dreamed  that  he  saw 
several  of  his  friends  who  were  dead,  and  said  to  those 
around,  he  felt  sure  he  should  be  in  the  Reinga  himself 
before  the  next  night ; his  interpretation  proved  to  be  too 
true ; that  very  day  he  and  his  companion  were  cruelly 
murdered. 

To  dream  of  ascending  a precipice  to  a pa  on  the  top  of  a 
hill,  without  success,  is  a very  bad  sign,  and  a sure  token  of 
failing  in  whatever  pursuit  the  person  may  be  engaged. 
To  dream  of  being  speared,  is  a sign  of  meeting  some 
person  or  friend  ; on  a journey  through  a lonely  forest,  one 
of  my  natives  had  such  a dream,  and  so  general  was  the 
expectation  of  meeting  some  one  next  day,  that  my  com- 
panions repeatedly  hallooed,  that  the  person  who  was 
supposed  to  be  coming  might  hear  them.  If,  in  the  time  of 
war,  when  two  parties  went  out  against  each  other,  and  slept 
with  only  a little  space  between  them,  one  should  dream  that 
he  saw  a kakariki,  green  parrot,  in  the  oven,  divided  into  two 
parts,  it  would  be  a sure  sign  of  his  own  death  the  next  day. 
If  a person  dreams  of  another  squeezing  the  juice  of  the  tutu, 
coriaria  sarmentosa,  on  the  road,  it  is  a certain  sign  that  a 
murder  will  be  committed ; the  juice  of  tutu  being  the  emblem 
of  blood.  If  you  dream  of  a rat  being  caught  in  a trap,  it 
is  also  a very  bad  sign,  and  a sure  token  of  murder.  If  of 
seeing  a person's  hair  singed,  it  is  a sign  that  his  head  chief 
will  die.  If  you  dream  that  you  see  a person  eating,  who 
does  not  offer  any  portion  of  the  food  to  you,  it  is  a sign  of 
death.  If  of  a friend  who  is  on  a journey,  and  that  you 
speak  to  him  and  receive  a reply,  it  is  a sure  sign  that  per- 


MARRIAGE. 


335 


son  is  not  coming  back.  If  you  dream  of  friends,  that  they 
turn  to  you,  and  you  see  them  in  good  health,  it  is  a bad  sign. 
If  you  dream  of  a friend  on  a journey,  but  do  not  see  his 
face,  which  he  turns  away  from  you,  as  persons  do  who  dance 
the  maimai , or  nga  ngahu,  it  is  a good  sign  of  your  friend 
being  near  his  home.  If  you  dream  of  your  kumara  shoot- 
ing vigorously,  it  is  a sign  of  a good  crop.  If  you  dream 
yon  hear  the  name  of  your  absent  friend  mentioned,  and 
that  you  go  to  look  for  him,  but  do  not  see  his  face,  it  is  a 
sure  sign  of  soon  meeting  him.  If  you  dream  of  swimming, 
it  prognosticates  a rainy  day.  If  you  are  ill,  and  dream 
of  some  absent  friend,  who  turns  and  salutes  you,  it  is  a 
good  sign  that  you  will  recover,  and  again  see  your  friend. 
Kawana  Paipai,  when  at  a distance  from  home,  laid  up 
with  sickness,  dreamed  that  he  saw  his  minister's  wife,  who 
turned  to  him  and  shook  his  hand  ; this  good  omen  so 
cheered  him  up,  that  he  speedily  got  well,  and  on  his  re- 
turn, the  first  thing  he  did  was  to  go  and  shake  hands  with 
her.  If  a tohunga,  who  accompanies  a taua,  or  war  party, 
dreams  that  his  atua  is  killed  by  the  atua  of  the  place  they 
are  going  to  attack,  it  is  such  a bad  omen  that  the  taua 
immediately  returns.  If  a person  dreams  that  he  sees  another 
coming  to  kill  him,  it  is  a good  sign  ; the  person  seen  will  be 
killed  himself.  One  way  of  obtaining  answers  from  the 
gods,  was  by  dreams.  When  the  priest  was  in  any  doubt, 
he  waited  for  his  god  to  reveal  his  will  to  him  by  dreams, 
and  he  generally  had  one  which  conveyed  the  required  in- 
formation.* 


Marriage. 

The  Maori  seem  to  differ  from  almost  every  known  tribe  or 
nation  in  having  no  regular  Marriage  Ceremony ; they  had 
neither  karakia  nor  any  rite  to  mark  an  event,  which  in  nearly 
every  other  part  of  the  world,  is  accounted  the  most  joyous 
in  life.t 

* See  i Sam.  xxix.  15. 

f In  Burmah  also  there  are  no  religious  ceremonies  at  marriage. — See  Mal- 
colm's Travels  in  Burmah. 


336 


MARRIAGE. 


The  ancient  and  most  general  way  of  obtaining*  a wife  was 
for  the  gentleman  to  summon  his  friends,  and  make  a regular 
taua,  or  fight,  to  carry  off  the  lady  by  force,  and  oftentimes 
with  great  violence ; even  when  a girl  was  bestowed  in 
marriage  by  her  parents,  some  distant  relatives  might  feel 
aggrieved,  and  fancy  they  had  a greater  right  to  her  as 
a wife  for  one  of  their  tribe ; or,  if  the  girl  had  eloped 
with  some  one  on  whom  she  had  placed  her  affections,  then 
her  father  or  brothers  would  refuse  their  consent,  and  in 
either  case  would  carry  a taua  against  the  husband  and  his 
friends,  to  regain  possession  of  her,  either  by  persuasion 
or  force.  If  confined  in  a house,  they  would  pull  it  down, 
and  when  access  was  gained,  then  a fearful  contest  ensued,  and 
the  unfortunate  female  thus  placed  between  two  contending 
parties,  would  soon  be  divested  of  every  rag  of  clothing,  and 
be  seized  by  her  head,  hair,  or  limbs ; as  those  who  con- 
tended for  her  became  tired  with  the  struggle,  fresh  comba- 
tants would  supply  their  places  from  the  rear,  climbing  over 
the  shoulders  of  their  friends,  and  so  edge  themselves  into 
the  mass  immediately  round  the  woman,  whose  cries  and 
shrieks  would  be  unheeded  by  her  savage . friends,  and  in 
this  way,  the  poor  creature  was  often  nearly  torn  to  pieces  ; 
these  savage  contests  sometimes  ended  in  the  strongest  party 
bearing  off  in  triumph  the  naked  person  of  the  bride ; in 
some  cases,  after  a long  season  of  suffering,  she  recovered, 
to  be  given  to  a person  for  whom  she  had  no  affection ; in 
others,  to  die  within  a few  hours  or  days  from  the  injuries 
received ; it  was  not  uncommon  for  the  weaker  party,  when 
they  found  they  could  not  prevail,  for  one  of  them  to  put  an 
end  to  the  contest  by  suddenly  plunging  his  spear  into  the 
woman’s  bosom,  to  hinder  her  from  becoming  the  property 
of  another. 

Even  when  all  were  agreeable,  it  was  still  customary  for 
the  bridegroom  to  go  with  a party,  and  appear  to  take  her 
away  by  force,  her  friends  yielding  her  up  after  a feigned 
struggle ; a few  days  afterwards,  the  parents  of  the  lady, 
with  all  her  relatives,  came  upon  the  bridegroom  for  his 
pretended  abduction;  after  much  speaking  and  apparent 


MARRIAGE. 


337 


anger  it  ended  with  his  making  a handsome  present  of  fine 
mats,  &c.,  and  giving  an  abundant  feast. 

When  the  parents  thus  consented,  they  usually  said,  E 
pai  ana  kia  moe  korua , ko  to  tungane  kia  kanga  iho  ano 
korua,  kanga  iho  ano  kia  korua  ano. 

Sometimes  the  father  simply  told  his  intended  son-in-law, 
he  might  come  and  live  with  his  daughter  ; she  was  thence- 
forth considered  his  wife,  he  lived  with  his  father-in-law,  and 
became  one  of  the  tribe  or  hapu,  to  which  his  wife  belonged, 
and  in  case  of  war,  was  often  obliged  to  fight  against  his  own 
relatives.  So  common  is  the  custom  of  the  bridegroom  going 
to  live  with  his  wife’s  family,  that  it  frequently  occurs,  when 
he  refuses  to  do  so,  she  will  leave  him,  and  go  back  to 
her  relatives ; several  instances  came  under  my  notice  where 
young  men  have  tried  to  break  through  this  custom,  and  have 
so  lost  their  wives. 

The  native  term  of  courtship  is  he  aru  aru,  literally,  a fol- 
lowing or  pursuing  after.  Bopa ,*  a declaration  of  love  by 
pinching  the  fingers.  He  puna  rua, , a struggling  of  two 
suitors  by  pulling  the  poor  girl,  who  became  the  property  of 
the  stronger.  Tau  mau  to  betroth  or  promise  a girl  in 
marriage ; wai  aipo , when  she  is  given  and  resides  with  her 
husband. 

Every  chief  was  at  liberty  to  take  as  many  wives  as  he 
pleased ; if  he  had  several,  they  were  called  the  hoahoa  of 
the  head  wife,  the  usual  number  was  from  two  to  six,  seldom 
more,  and  in  many  cases  only  one,  especially  amongst  the 
lower  orders ; the  number  of  wives  added  to  the  husband’s 
importance,  each  having  her  own  mara,  or  farm,  and  re- 
tainers, according  to  her  rank;  and  furnishing  her  share  of 
the  supplies  for  the  establishment.  When  a chief  had  several 
wives,  he  could  then  entertain  guests  without  fear  of  scarcity, 
and  this  was  a sign  of  greatness.  When  a man  left  home 
on  a long  journey,  he  repeated  a karakia  over  his  wife,  that 

* Rofia  is  probably  derived  from  Ro,  the  praying  mantis,  and  pa  to  touch  : 
this  insect  pinches  those  who  touch  it  with  its  fore  legs,  which  are  covered  with 
spines.  If  a married  woman  sees  one,  it  is  regarded  as  a sign  of  conception. 

Z 


338 


MARRIAGE. 


she  might  he  faithful,  with  a curse  on  any  one  who  should  do 
him  dishonor  : — 

Ko  Maru  kia  tiakina  te  waha  o runga, 

Ko  Tutangata  kino  kia  tiakina  te  waha  o raro, 

Ka  wakanoho  ko  mata  te  kuwaha  ka  kapi  ka  urahia, 

He  aha  te  manu  nana  i noho  te  upoko  o taku  kaha  ? 

He  katipo,  he  karewa,  he  au  ika,  kia  tika  ki  te  tangata, 

Nana  i makutu,  nana  i kaia. 

The  first  wife  was  generally  a lady  of  rank,  and  always 
viewed  as  the  head,  however  many  there  might  be,  and  of 
whatever  rank ; some  were  regarded  as  only  servile  ones. 
Wives  in  general  were  treated  with  great  respect,  and  had 
a voice  in  all  their  councils ; in  fact  they  enjoyed  great 
liberty,  and  perhaps  there  are  few  races  who  treat  their 
women  with  more  deference  than  the  Maori.  The  first-born 
son,  though  his  mother  was  only  a slave,  had  all  the  rights 
of  primogeniture ; but  should  he  be  the  child  of  the  lady 
wife,  he  then  acquired  the  dignity  of  an  ariki.  This  rank  was 
also  given  to  her  first-born,  although  a female. 

Infanticide  was  formerly  very  common ; it  was  generally 
perpetrated  by  the  mother,  and  frequently  from  grief  for  the 
loss  of  her  husband,  or  in  revenge  for  his  ill-treatment  of  her. 
A woman  of  the  Thames  destroyed  seven  of  her  children,  the 
reason  she  assigned  for  such  unnatural  cruelty,  was  that  she 
might  be  light  to  run  away,  if  attacked  or  pursued  by  the 
enemy  : this  was  especially  the  fate  of  female  children ; but 
in  general  they  show  great  affection  for  their  offspring ; 
indeed  the  children  are  suffered  to  do  as  they  like ; they  sit 
in  all  their  councils,  and  are  seldom  checked  \ once,  and 
once  only,  I saw  a man,  whose  child  was  very  troublesome 
in  church,  take  him  up  and  run  out  with  him  to  a river  close 
by,  in  which  he  kept  ducking  him  until  he  ceased  crying.* 
The  children  seem  to  be  more  precocious  than  those  of 
Europeans,  and  however  unruly  in  younger  days,  when 
about  sixteen  they  become  quite  men,  and  frequently  as 

* This  is  the  usual  way  of  curing  little  squeaking  pigs  ; they  hold  them  under 
water  until  they  are  quiet. 


BATING. 


339 


grave  and  staid,  except  in  war  time ; then  these  youths  are 
the  worst,  and  commit  the  greatest  excesses. 

Eating. 

Robertson  states,  that  the  American  Indians  were  remark- 
able for  being  small  eaters ; this  could  not  be  affirmed  of  the 
natives  of  New  Zealand ; in  their  natural  state  they  were 
great  consumers,  and  seemed  to  prefer  fat  and  oily  sub- 
stances, such  as  no  European,  unless  pressed  by  hunger,  or 
from  the  extreme  north  perhaps,  could  touch ; the  Maori 
fed  even  on  putrid  whales,  and  tainted  meat,  with  apparent 
relish.  Man,  indeed,  in  a savage  state,  does  not  seem  to 
possess  the  sense  of  smell  to  the  same  extent,  as  in  an  ad- 
vanced state  of  civilization,  or  else  his  perceptions  are 
different,  and  the  smell  of  putrid  substances  is  not  only  not 
offensive,  but  positively  agreeable. 

Uncivilized  man  appears  to  prefer  fat  and  oil  as  food.  I 
have  frequently  seen  natives  eating  their  potatoes  with 
putrid  train  oil,  plentifully  poured  over  them : also,  when 
pigs  were  roasted  whole,  and  the  inside  filled  with  a pool  of 
melted  fat,  they  would  stoop  down  and  drink  it  the  same  as 
water. 

There  is  one  thing,  however,  to  be  stated : they  did  not 
formerly  live  on  animal  food,  few  tasted  it  except  on  par- 
ticular occasions,  when  pigs  were  killed  to  entertain  stran- 
gers; but  this  is  a comparatively  recent  custom,  since  the 
use  of  pork  has  been  derived  from  Europeans ; previously, 
fish  and  birds,  and  especially  human  beings,  were  all  they 
had,  in  addition  to  the  taro,  kumara,  and  fern-root ; we  can- 
not wonder,  when  their  diet  was  so  entirely  vegetable,  that 
they  should  occasionally  eat  to  excess.  The  quantity  of 
potatoes  which  a native  consumes  at  a meal  is  very  great, 
but  the  nourishment  derived  from  them  is  small.  The 
country  abounds  in  eels,  which  attain  an  immense  size, 
become  very  fat,  and  are  considered  great  delicacies,  but 
those  who  freely  eat  of  them  generally  suffer  afterwards ; 
Egypt  is  also  a country  abounding  in  eels,  yet,  Herodotus 

z 2 


310 


EATING. 


states,  they  were  forbidden  for  food  as  in  the  Mosaic  law ; 
his  English  translator  adds,  the  probable  reason  was  their 
having  a tendency  to  produce  scrofula  ; it  is  remarkable, 
that  this  is  the  prevailing  disease  of  the  Maori,  and  that 
they  are  great  eaters  of  the  eel.* 

The  natives  have  only  two  meals  a day,  the  first  being 
about  ten,  the  other  at  sun-set,  or  a little  earlier ; but  for- 
merly in  those  months  when  food  was  scarce,  they  had  only 
one,  and  no  other  relish  for  their  potatoes  than  a little  sow- 
thistle, or  wild  cabbage.  A native  will  endure  hunger  very 
patiently ; but  those  who  live  with  Europeans  are  seldom 
greater  eaters  than  ourselves. 

Though  extremely  dirty  in  their  persons,  they  are  cleanly 
in  their  food,  which  is  served  up  in  baskets,  these  are  neatly 
and  expeditiously  made  by  the  females,  whilst  it  is  being 
cooked ; guests  of  rank  have  each  their  fresh-made  basket 
set  before  them,  and  when  the  meal  is  over  they  are  thrown 
away ; one  reason  appears  to  have  been,  the  fear  of  witch- 
craft, or  of  destroying  their  tapu,  by  eating  out  of  a basket 
which  had  been  used  by  some  one  else ; a chief  never  ate 
after  any  one,  or  allowed  any  one  to  eat  after  him ; the 
remains  of  his  food,  with  the  basket  which  contained  them, 
were  thrown  into  the  wahi  tapu,  that  no  one  might  obtain  any 
portion  with  which  to  bewitch  him ; formerly  they  had  the 
greatest  dread  of  witchcraft  by  such  means ; when  a great 
chief  or  tohunga  took  his  food,  he  might  frequently  be  seen 
seated  within  a little  fence  of  basket-work,  or  else  in  the 
corner  of  the  verandah,  apart  from  the  rest.  In  general,  a 
basket  is  placed  before  every  three  or  four  persons  ; it  is 
filled  with  potatoes,  garnished  with  a piece  of  meat,  a fish, 
or  a bird,  and  in  default  of  these,  with  a little  sow-thistle  or 
wild  cabbage  ; when  there  is  meat,  they  pass  it  round,  each 
taking  a bite  or  tearing  off  a portion ; and  when  the  meal 
is  over,  they  wipe  their  greasy  fingers  on  the  backs  of  the 
attendant  dogs,  which  supply  the  place  of  serviettes,  for 

* Deaths  from  over-feasting  on  the  Pihapiharau , or  Lamprey,  are  by  no 
means  uncommon  amongst  them. 


EATING. 


841 


their  noses  are  generally  thrust  into  the  basket  as  soon  as 
the  last  hand  is  withdrawn.* 

Baskets  appear  to  have  been  used  in  a similar  way  by  the 
ancient  Egyptians  ; they  are  represented  in  their  paintings, 
as  well  as  alluded  to  in  Scripture.  The  chief  baker  had  in 
his  dream  a basket  of  bakemeats  for  Pharaoh ; and  so  in 
Israel,  Jehu  commanded  the  elders  of  Jezreel  to  bring  him 
the  heads  of  Ahab's  sons  in  baskets  ; and  the  Israelite  was 
blessed  in  his  basket  and  store. 

Formerly  they  were  much  pinched  for  food  in  winter; 
that  period  went  by  the  name  of  the  grumbling  months , they 
had  no  other  name  for  them,  being  a blank  in  their  calendar, 
as  they  could  do  nothing  but  sit  in  their  smoky  huts,  with 
eyes  always  filled  with  tears. 

In  times  of  scarcity,  the  only  food  they  had  to  depend 
upon  was  fern -root  and  shell  fish.  The  traveller  is  often 
surprised,  as  he  journeys  along  the  coast,  by  the  large  heaps 
of  shells  which  he  sees  on  almost  every  tuound  he  passes  ; 
these  are  records  of  bygone  scarcity,  and  frequently  he  will 
find  fragments  of  human  bones  mixed  with  them,  it  was 
at  such  times  that  the  least  offence  sufficed  to  cause  an 
angry  and  hungry  savage  to  knock  his  slave  on  the  head, 
to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  hunger ; though  cannibalism  was 
practised  on  a grand  scale,  still  there  were  some  even  of 
the  chiefs  who  could  not  bear  the  smell  or  sight  of  human 
flesh  without  being  sick.  It  is  remarkable  that  some  na- 
tives cannot  eat  the  pigeon,  when  it  feeds  on  the  young 
leaves  of  the  Tcowai , the  New  Zealand  laburnum,  Edwardsia 
micro  jphylla ; the  Nga  ti  hine  kino,  a hapu  of  the  Nga  ti 

* Vigne,  in  his  travels  in  Cashmere,  thus  describes  a meal  given  him  by  the 
Rajah  of  Tira,  vol.  i,  page  109  : — “They  did  not  eat  with  me  themselves,  but 
a table  was  placed  for  me  beside  them,  and  they  talked  to  me  during  the  repast, 
which  was  served  up  in  dishes  made  of  dock  leaves,  sewn  together,  and  my 
drinking  cup  was  of  the  same  material.  The  Sikhs  are  less  particular  in  these 
matters  than  the  Hindus,  and  will  eat  twice,  and  oftener,  out  of  the  same  plate  ; 
but  the  Hindus,  more  especially  the  Brahmin  or  the  Rajput,  will  not  eat  twice 
out  of  any  vessel  that  cannot  be  cleansed  with  earth  : when,  therefore,  they 
play  the  host,  the  Hindus  cause  their  dishes  to  be  made  of  dock  leaves,  which 
are  thrown  away  after  they  have  been  used.” 


342 


FEASTS. 


Ruaka,  a Wanganui  tribe,  are  said  to  have  weak  heads,  rahi 
rahiy  and  are  especially  adduced  as  an  example ; the  pigeon 
at  such  times  gives  them  violent  headaches,  though  other 
persons  can  eat  it  with  impunity.  The  natives  are  now 
gradually  acquiring  a taste  for  European  food,  and  some 
have  quite  renounced  their  old  way  of  living. 

Some  years  ago,  Tamihana  te  Rauparaha  and  several 
young  chiefs  of  the  Ngatiraukawa  formed  a kind  of  club 
amongst  themselves,  determining  to  give  up  their  native 
customs,  and  adopt  those  of  Europeans ; they  had  good 
houses  erected,  and  took  their  meals  in  the  same  way  we 
do,  which  they  have  persevered  in  doing,  and  this  has  be- 
come a means  of  raising  their  tribe  in  the  scale  of  civilization. 

Feasts. 

The  hdkari , or  feast,  was  formerly  given  either  as  a 
paremata , return  for  a previous  one,  or  on  some  par- 
ticular occasion,  such  as  a marriage,  making  peace,  or  the 
stirring  up  a war,  for  obtaining  help  either  to  build  a 
house,  make  a canoe,  to  hunt,  or  fish ; they  were  some- 
times given  by  individuals,  but  more  frequently  by  the 
inhabitants  of  one  place  to  those  of  another ; the  halcari  was 
often  on  a very  grand  scale,  proportioned  to  the  wealth  and 
influence  of  those  who  gave  it.  Sometimes  a number  of 
poles  were  planted  in  the  ground,  fifty  or  sixty  feet  high, 
which  were  made  to  support  eight  or  ten  stories,  heaped  up 
with  baskets  of  food  to  the  very  top,  at  other  times  long 
walls  of  kumara  were  erected ; these  were  made  with  the 
greatest  care ; they  were  generally  about  four  feet  high,  as 
many  broad,  and  were  crowned  with  a covering  of  pigs 
roasted  whole ; several  hundreds  were  often  thus  killed  for  a 
single  feast,  or  else  their  place  was  supplied  with  dried  fish, 
and  with  what  is  considered  a very  great  delicacy,  birds,  or 
pork  cut  up  in  small  pieces,  and  cooked  in  their  own  fat ; 
these  are  packed  up  in  large  hua,  calabashes,  or  in  papa, 
ornamental  dishes,  made  of  the  bark  -of  the  totara,  and 
tastefully  decorated  with  feathers.  When  the  guests  arrive 


NIGHT  SPEAKING. 


343 


they  are  received  with  a loud  welcome,  and  afterwards  a 
person,  who  acts  as  master  of  ceremonies,  having  a rod 
in  his  hand,  marches  slowly  along  the  line  of  food,  which 
is  generally  placed  in  the  mcirae , or  chief  court  of  the 
pa,  and  then  names  the  tribe  for  which  each  division  is 
intended,  striking  it  with  his  rod  : this  being  done,  the 
chief  of  the  party  receiving  the  food,  sub-divides  it  amongst 
his  followers,  it  is  then  carried  off  to  their  respective  homes ; 
the  calabashes  are  often  tastefully  ornamented  with  carv- 
ing, red  ochre,  and  feathers  : these  feasts  are  generally 
political  meetings ; both  before  and  after  the  division  of 
food  many  speeches  are  made,  the  speaker  walking  up  and 
down  a space  left  for  him  by  the  crowd ; he  only  speaks 
as  he  goes  one  way,  walking  back  in  silence,  and  as  he 
becomes  animated,  moves  with  increased  celerity.  On 
the  occasion  of  a marriage,  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom 
provide  the  feast  for  him,  and  those  of  the  bride  for  her; 
but  the  two  do  not  eat  together.  When  a chief  intends  to 
give  a feast,  he  sends  some  member  of  his  family  as  a herald 
to  summon  those  for  whom  it  is  intended.  As  he  passes 
through  each  village,  he  sings,  Uea  uea  i te  ypou  o tou  whare, 
Ida  wiriwiri,  Ma  tutangatanga  wakairi  Tcapua  naku,  ki  rung  a 
moeahau  taku  kira  ka  tongia  e te  anu  matao  e tahu  e — nau 
mai  e waha  i taku  tua  he  karere  taua , he  karere  wainga.  If  it 
be  a feast  to  invite  the  individuals  thus  summoned  to  war, 
the  words  he  karere  taua  are  used ; if  to  a feast  only,  the 
words  he  karere  wainga  are  spoken.  If  those  invited  do  not 
wish  to  partake  of  the  feast,  they  reply,  Penu  ki  taku  kainga, 
e kore  au  e tae  atu  kahore  aku  jparemata  talii  utu  ki  a koe. 

Night  Speaking. 

Night  is  the  favorite  time  for  the  Maori  orator  to  make 
speeches ; he  waits  until  all  is  still  in  the  pa,  and  then  steps 
forth  from  his  house  and  marches  about  in  front  of  it,  or  walks 
into  the  marae,  and  then  in  a loud  shrill  tone  sino-s  some  old 
song  which  bears  on  the  subject  he  is  going  to  speak  upon. 
When  this  is  finished  he  commences  his  speech,  which,  when 


844 


NIGHT  SPEAKING. 


concluded,  is  generally  answered  by  another,  and  thus  the 
discussion  is  frequently  kept  up  during  the  best  part  of  the 
night.  In  the  stillness  of  evening  the  orator  is  heard  from 
one  end  of  the  pa  to  the  other,  and  always  has  an  attentive 
audience ; when  numbers  are  congregated  together,  this  often 
forms  a very  effective  way  of  securing  attention ; should  the 
night  be  cold,  the  summons  only  is  given  outside,  and  all 
adjourn  to  the  principal  house,  generally  he  whare  puni , a 
hot-house.  In  former  days  a large  hollow  stone,  or  calabash, 
was  filled  with  oil,  in  which  were  two  wicks  made  of  twisted 
flax,  this  formed  the  lamp,  and  often  these  koreros  or 
councils  lasted  till  daylight ; this  was  the  general  way  of 
holding  them. 

The  whare  runanga , or  council  chamber,  was  often  a house 
built  solely  for  the  purpose.  When  the  Nga  ti  rua  nui  began 
to  be  disaffected,  they  erected  a very  large  building  at 
Manawapou,  a hundred  and  twenty  feet  long  by  thirty  in 
width,  with  two  doors  and  porches,  this  was  called  Tai  poro 
he  nui , or  the  ending  of  the  matter ; here  was  the  commence- 
ment of  their  league  against  land  selling  to  the  British 
Government ; afterwards  similar  buildings  were  erected  in 
every  place ; Wiremu  Tako  built  a large  one,  in  which  every 
part  had  a symbolical  meaning  attached  to  it ; but  the  whare 
runanga  of  olden  times  were  simply  houses  in  which  they 
met  to  work,  and  talk  over  the  affairs  of  their  tribe,  when 
it  was  too  rainy  to  work  in  their  cultivations. 


HE  PAPA,  OR  CARVED  DISH. 


V 


CHAPTER  XX. 


AMUSEMENTS. 


BOAT  HARBOUR  IN  MOTUTAIKO,  TAUPO  LAKE. 


It  has  been  thought,  that  were  a child  from  its  birth  to  be 
kept  from  hearing  the  sound  of  any  language,  it  would  com- 
mence with  the  tongue  which  was  spoken  by  the  first  parents 
of  the  human  race;  but  this  has  not  been  verified — the 
child  was  found  to  have  none  at  all;  it  appears  more  reason- 
able to  find  a proof  of  the  identity  of  our  race  in  thought, 
rather  than  in  sound ; the  latter  varying  from  physical  causes, 
which  may  affect  the  body  without  influencing  the  mind,  the 
early  feelings  of  the  child  appear  to  furnish  a better  guide  to 
what  is  really  common  to  all,  and  if  an  identity  of  amuse- 
ments can  be  traced  in  parts  which  are  so  remote  and 
severed  from  each  other  as  England  and  New  Zealand,  we 
cannot  well  help  allowing  that  this  similarity  is  likewise 
a strong  proof  of  identity  of  origin  as  well;  I remember,  as 


346 


AMUSEMENTS. 


a child,  joining  in  the  pursuit  of  an  unfortunate  white 
butterfly,  which  we  called  a Frenchman  ; and  in  after  years, 
in  France,  being  much  struck  by  seeing  a number  of 
children  knock  down  a red  butterfly,  a poor  queen  of  the 
meadows,  with  the  cry,  down  with  the  English,  down  with 
the  English,  but  this  is  not  so  remarkable  as  finding  games 
and  pursuits  of  children  similar  to  our  own  in  such  lone 
islands  of  the  southern  hemisphere  as  New  Zealand. 

Te  Kahu , or  He  manu  waka-tuku-tuku.  He  pakau. — The 
first  game  presenting  this  similarity,  is  that  of  flying  the 
kite,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  their  name  appears  to  be  drawn 
from  the  same  object  as  ours  : the  kite  is  the  old  term  for 
the  hawk,  and  the  name  kahu  is  also  that  for  the  same  kind 
of  predaceous  bird  hovering  over  its  quarry,  from  whence 
doubtless  the  identity  of  thought  arose ; their  figure,  though 
differing  from  ours,  is  generally  a rough  imitation  of  the 
bird,  with  its  great  outspread  wings ; these  kites  are  fre- 
quently made  of  large  dimensions  from  raupo  leaves,  a kind 
of  sedge,  neatly  sewn  together,  and  kept  in  shape  by  a 
slight  frame- work ; the  string  is  most  expeditiously  formed, 
and  lengthened  at  pleasure,  being  merely  the  split  leaves  of 
the  flax  plant : this  is  a very  favourite  amusement. 


He  poro.—He  potaka. — He  kaihora. — He  kaihotaka—  The 
whipping-top,  is  another  game  which  is  played  in  every  part 
of  the  island ; the  top  used  is  more  of  a cone,  and  of  less 


AMUSEMENTS. 


347 


diameter  than  our  English  one,  but  in  other  respects  just  the 
same. 

He  ivaij  or  maui. — Cat's-cradles  is  a game  very  similar 
to  ours,  but  the  cord  is  made  to  assume  many  more  forms, 
and  these  are  said  to  be  different  scenes  in  their  mythology, 
such  as  Hine-nui-te-po,  mother  night  bringing  forth  her 
progeny,  Maru  and  the  gods,  and  Maui  fishing  up  the  land, 
men,  canoes,  houses,  &c.,  are  also  represented.  Some  state 
that  Maui  invented  this  game. 

He  pin. — The  skipping-rope.  Two  generally  hold  the  rope, 
whilst  a third  skips  over  it;  sometimes  one  end  is  tied  to  a 
post,  and  another  twirls  the  rope,  while  several  jump  over  at 
the  same  time,  it  is  also  used  by  one  person,  the  same  as 
with  us. 

He  morere. — He  moari. — This  is  a lofty  pole,  generally 
erected  near  a river,  from  the  top  of  which  about  a dozen 
ropes  are  attached  ; the  parties  who  use  it  take  hold  of  them, 
and  swing  round,  going  over  the  precipice,  and,  whilst  doing 
so,  sometimes  let  go,  falling  into  the  water ; occasionally 
serious  accidents  have  thus  occurred  by  striking  the  bank. 

Te  takaro  ringaringa , or  wrestling,  is  a very  general  amuse- 
ment of  young  men,  who  pride  themselves  on  their  skill 
in  throwing  one  another,  as  much,  perhaps,  as  our  own 
countrymen  have  ever  done. 

Te  para  mako  consisted  in  throwing  sharp-pointed  sticks 
at  each  other,  and  skilfully  warding  them  off,  by  turning  the 
body  away  when  they  saw  the  dart  coming.  Sometimes 
an  unskilful  person  lost  his  life  in  playing  this  game. 

Te  para , or  para  toitoi , was  a more  harmless  game ; it 
consisted  in  throwing  the  reed-like  stalks  of  the  toitoi, 
blunted,  at  each  other ; this  was  a boy's  game. 

Te  taurumaki , variously  called,  taururumaki  or  taurumaki - 
makij  is  played  in  the  water,  and  consists  in  one  person 
trying  to  keep  the  other  under  the  longest ; thus  one  was 
frequently  almost  drowned  by  the  other. 

Te  teka,  or  neti,  is  a game  played  with  fern  stalks,  which 
are  darted  to  see  who  can  throw  them  the  furthest. 

He  ti , or  tii,  is  a game  played  with  the  fingers ; also  the 


348 


AMUSEMENTS. 


homi-homi,  which  consists  in  opening  and  shutting  the  thumbs 
and  fingers. 

The  puni  puni  is  a game  played  with  the  fingers  whilst  the 
following  words  are  sung  : — 


Kei  te  wai  nui, 

Kei  te  wai  roa, 

Ka  tangi  te  korora,  kororo, 
Awhe  te  puni  puni, 

Awhe  te  paro  paro, 
Anohoanga. 


By  the  great  water, 

By  the  long  water, 

The  seagull  and  the  penguin  cry, 
Where  is  the  entering, 

Where  is  the  closing, 

For  the  resting. 


If  the  fingers  enter  each  other  whilst  these  words  are  being 
uttered,  the  game  is  ended ; if  not,  it  is  again  repeated. 
This  was  also  used  as  a kind  of  divination,  if  all  the  fingers 
entered  at  once  it  was  favorable,  if  not,  the  contrary. 

Tutu  hcii. — A circle  being  formed,  one  takes  a little  stone, 
or  anything  else,  in  his  hand,  and  then  another  repeats  : — 


Kura,  kura,  kura,  winiwini ; 
Kura  wanawana, 

Te  wai  atu,  takukai  nei ; 

Ki  te  kai  motiti,  ki  te  kai 
motata  ; 

Ka  rere  taua  ki  hea  ? 

Ka  rere  taua  ki  pohou  nui, 
Ki  pohou  roa,  hei  te  koti, 
Hei  te  kota,  toreti,  toreta, 
Kai  a wai. 


Listen,  listen,  where  is  the  stone ; 
Listen,  in  what  hand  is  it  hid  ; 
Seek  where  it  is  hidden  ; 

Seek  for  the  stone,  is  it  here  ? is 
it  there  ? 

Where  shall  we  go  ? 

We  will  go  to  the  many, 

To  the  multitude, 

To  the  Ti,  to  the  Ta, 

Tell  me,  tell  me, 

With  whom  is  it  to  be  found. 


A person  then  goes  round  the  circle,  and  guesses  in  whose 
hand  it  is  hid,  each  having  his  fist  closed ; if  he  is  right,  the 
person  who  has  the  stone,  takes  his  place,  and  goes  round  ; 
if  he  is  wrong,  he  continues  until  he  discovers  where  it  is 
hid. 

He  waha  pupuni,  or  piri,  is  the  game  of  hide  and  seek 
very  similar  to  our  own. 

He  poi.— This  is  a game  played  with  an  ornamented  ball, 
causing  it  to  revolve  by  a small  string  attached,  and  singing 
at  the  same  time.  The  ball  is  often  sent  to  a pa,  and  played 
as  an  invitation  to  join  in  a war  expedition. 


AMUSEMENTS. 


349 


He  liaka . — The  dance  was  a favourite  amusement.  There 
were  various  kinds  of  them,  many  were  very  indecent  ; 
some  were  only  danced  by  females,  others  by  men,  but  in 
general  both  sexes  joined  in  this  amusement. 

Te  Ko  Jciri  is  an  amusement  of  diving  by  closing  the  legs 
and  arms,  and  then  sinking  in  deep  water,  feet  foremost.  I 
have  seen  a native  thus  drop  down  over  the  side  of  the  canoe 
to  a great  depth  and  pick  up  with  his  toes  a tobacco  pipe  he 
had  noticed  at  the  bottom,  using  them  as  readily  as  his 
fingers. 

Te  Ko  Jdri  also  is  jumping  from  a pole  into  deep  water : 
before  doing  so  the  party  says  : — 

Puhi  puhi  rawa  ki  te  keriru ; Flutter  like  pigeons’  feathers  ; 

Mehemea  e kato  ana,  ko  kiri.  And  if  the  water  be  calm,  dart 

downwards. 

There  was  also  the  turujoejoeke,  or  tumbling  head  over 
heels;  walking  with  stilts,  jpouturu ; the  rourou , a game 
played  with  stones  in  the  hands ; the  kai  is  a puzzle  to  undo 
a knot,  or  find  out  a riddle  ; and  many  similar  ones. 

* But  the  chief  amusement  of  the  females  was,  and  still  is 
the  tangi,  or  crying ; the  ladies  pride  themselves  on  doing 
this  in  the  most  affecting  way,  so  that  a stranger  would  be 
deceived,  and  not  think  it  possible  that  it  could  be  a mere 
mockery  of  woe,  and  yet  it  is  nothing  more ; tears  are  shed 
in  abundance,  and  the  hands  are  wrung,  as  if  suffering  the 
most  poignant  grief,  whilst  the  most  heart-rending  cries  ex- 
cite the  sympathy  of  the  company.  The  ladies  have  their 
heads  adorned  with  fillets  of  leaves,  or  of  dog's  hair,  and  so 
much  joy  do  they  experience  in  this  exciting  amusement, 
that  they  look  forward  to  a good  crying  with  the  same  desire 
a young  lady  in  England  does  to  a dance  or  ball. 

* The  natives  have  another  amusement,  which  consists  in  rendering  their 
conversation  unintelligible  to  strangers,  by  adding  one  or  more  letters  to  each 
word  as  they  may  previously  agree  upon,  so  that  only  they  who  are  in  the 
secret,  can  understand  what  is  said  : thus,  instead  of  saying  kei  te  haere  au 
ki  reira,  they  would  say  te-ke-te-i  te  te-hae-^-re  te-a.-te-u  te- ki  te-re-te-i-te-ra  - 
few  can  find  this  out  when  spoken  quickly.  This  is  called  He  Kowetewete. 


350 


CHIEFS. 


When  a distinguished  party  of  strangers  arrive  at  a pa,, 
before  they  enter,  the  females  ascend  some  stage  or  elevated 
spot,  and  from  it  wave  a garment  or  branch,  loudly  invit- 
ing their  visitors  to  enter,  with  the  cry  haere  mai , haere 
mai,  or  nau  mai , nau  mai , they  walk  to  the  chief  marae  or 
court,  and  then  the  tangi  commences ; after  it  is  concluded, 
the  strangers  rub  noses  with  their  friends,  or  else  speeches 
are  made,  afterwards  food  is  brought  in  procession  by  the 
inhabitants  in  little  baskets,  each  carrying  one  in  his  right 
hand,  stretched  out,  with  the  left  thrown  back,  all  singing 
the  Putu,  or  song  of  invitation,  as  they  advance  towards  their 
guests,  before  whom  they  place  the  feast,  and  this  concludes 
the  entertainment. 

Since  tobacco  has  been  introduced  smoking  is  a great 
delight,  sometimes  the  pipe  is  passed  from  mouth  to  mouth  ; 
since  a very  heavy  duty  has  been  placed  upon  it,  the  culture 
of  tobacco  has  become  general,  and  led  to  their  making  it  so 
well  that  a tobacconist  has  been  known  to  give  them  weight 
for  weight  of  his  best  for  theirs.  They  have  also  become 
pipe  manufacturers.  At  Rotorua  a soft  kind  of  beautiful 
white  stone  is  found  which  closely  resembles  the  meerschaum, 
from  which  they  cut  out  pipes  with  great  skill,  these  are 
highly  prized  by  European  as  well  as  Maori  smokers. 

Chiefs. 

Great  Warriors  amongst  us,  and  from  remotest  antiquity 
have  been  likened  to  animals,  which  are  distinguished  for 
their  strength  and  courage.  Above  all  is  placed  the  lion : 
we  read  in  Scripture  of  the  lion  of  Judah,  of  a lion-like  man 
being  slain,  and  in  our  own  history  of  the  lion-hearted 
Richard.  We  have  also  the  Royal  Bengal  Tiger,  the  bear, 
the  leopard,  the  wolf : but  the  noblest  of  all  is  the  lion, 
hence  the  Hindu  title,  sing , a lion,  (not  unlike  in  sound  to 
our  word  king).  Rajah  Sing,  the  lion  prince.  Amongst  the 
natives  a different  mode  of  comparison  was  adopted,  they 
had  no  land  animals,  save  the  dog  and  the  rat,  though  Te 


CHIEFS. 


351 


Kuri  is  not  an  uncommon  name  for  a chief,  it  does  not  imply 
courage,  and  Te  Kiore  is  also  a common  name,  to  denote 
cunning ; Governor  Grey  was  so  called,  as  Governor  Brown 
was  Kahu,  the  hawk.  To  find  suitable  names,  however, 
even,  for  their  greatest  chiefs,  they  have  been  compelled  to 
go  to  the  sea  : thus  one,  celebrated  for  his  strength  and 
courage,  was  called  he  ika , which,  though  the  common 
name  for  fish  in  general,  is,  when  applied  to  a man,  solely 
referred  to  the  mango , or  shark,  as  celebrated  for  its  strength 
and  voracity,  or  to  the  taniwa,  a supposed  water  monster  of 
immense  power,  it  has  also  occasionally  been  applied  to  the 
whale,  thus  Rongomai  was  a whale,  and  the  chief  offspring 
of  Tangaroa,  the  great  god  of  the  ocean,  were  the  different 
kinds  of  sharks.  All  their  fabulous  heroes  were  styled  Ikas, 
great  fish,  and  this  being  a complimentary  name  became 
afterwards  a polite  term  of  address  : e ika,  equivalent  to  sir, 
or  noble  sir.  Ika  is  a term  for  a party,  or  tribe  of  men,  also 
for  the  quarrels  and  battles  of  their  chiefs. 

Every  great  chief  erected  a large  house,  he  whare  jouni , 
sufficient  to  contain  all  his  followers,  to  which  some  signifi- 
cant name  was  affixed,  and  this  house  being  spoken  of 
expressed  the  chief  and  his  people.  Te  tihi  o Manono , the 
top-knot  of  Manono,  &c. ; those  who  were  deified  are  also 
said  to  have  their  houses ; many  of  them  are  constellations, 
as  te  whare  o te  whieu .* 

A chief  speaks  of  his  tribe  as  his  house  or  family,  as  all 
were  accustomed  to  assemble  in  his  great  whare  jpuni  ; if  any 
of  his  tribe  offended,  or  did  any  thing  wrong,  he  spoke  of  its 
being  a breach  in  his  house ; also  of  himself  and  his  tribe  as 
being  two  persons,  “ Taua  ka  haere/-’ — “ Let  us  two  go/3 
that  is,  I and  my  tribe. 

The  grand  object  of  the  chiefs  was  to  excite  fear  amongst 
their  enemies  by  every  possible  means ; the  doing  so  almost 

* The  abode  of  high  chiefs  was  generally  apart  from  others,  being  compared 
to  great  fish,  reptiles,  or  monsters,  like  them  they  were  said  to  live  in  deep 
holes  or  caves  of  the  earth,  this  is  particularly  mentioned  in  all  the  old  tradi- 
tions, and  it  appears  to  have  been  anciently  the  case  amongst  other  nations. 
(See  Sam.  xvii.  8,  9.) 


352 


CHIEFS. 


insured  success.  When  lie  went  to  fight  he  tried  to  make 
the  enemy  think  he  was  the  more  powerful  of  the  two ; if 
he  succeeded,  half  the  victory  was  gained  before  the  first 
blow  was  struck.  This  was  done  by  rendering  his  counte- 
nance as  terrible  as  possible*  with  charcoal  and  red  ochre, 
the  face  being  marked  with  lines  of  the  former,  and  the  head 
and  person  smeared  over  with  the  latter,  thus  to  give  him 
a permament  dignity  the  tattoo  was  invented,  and  the 
anointing  with  red  ochre  and  oil  became  a sign  of  rank  : 
in  speaking  he  assumed  a tone  not  natural  to  him,  as  a 
kind  of  court  language,  he  kept  himself  distinct  from  his 
inferiors,  eating  separately ; his  person  was  sacred,  he  had 
the  power  of  holding  converse  with  the  gods,  in  fact  laid 
claim  to  being  one  himself,  making  the  tapu  a powerful 
adjunct  to  obtain  control  over  his  people  and  their  goods; 
every  means  were  used  to  acquire  this  dignity ; a large 
person  was  thought  to  be  of  the  highest  importance ; to 
acquire  this  extra  size,  the  child  of  a chief  was  generally 
provided  with  many  nurses,  each  contributing  to  his  support 
by  robbing  their  own  offspring  of  their  natural  sustenance ; 
thus,  whilst  they  were  half-starved,  miserable-looking  little 
creatures,  the  chieffs  child  was  the  contrary,  and  early 
became  remarkable  by  its  good  appearance ; nor  was  this 
feeling  confined  to  the  body ; the  chief  was  an  atua,  but 
there  were  powerful  and  powerless  gods ; each  naturally 
sought  to  make  himself  one  of  the  former ; the  plan  there- 
fore adopted,  was  to  incorporate  the  spirits  of  others  with 
their  own ; thus,  when  a warrior  slew  a chief,  he  immedi- 
ately gouged  out  his  eyes  and  swallowed  them,  the  atua 
tonga,  or  divinity,  being  supposed  to  reside  in  that  organ; 
thus  he  not  only  killed  the  body,  but  also  possessed  him- 
self of  the  soul  of  his  enemy,  and  consequently  the  more 
chiefs  he  slew,  the  greater  did  his  divinity  become ; the 
life  of  a chief  was  one  of  constant  war ; feuds  were  per- 

* This  plan  was  generally  tried  upon  Europeans  on  their  arrival ; a chief 
made  the  most  extraordinary  grimaces  and  noises  to  intimidate  the  author, 
when  he  found  it  was  treated  as  a joke,  he  suddenly  burst  out  into  a laugh  and 
gave  him  his  hand. 


CHIEFS. 


353 


petually  arising  and  scarcely  ever  terminated,  his  great 
delight  was  war,  it  was  his  noblest  occupation,  it  stamped 
dignity  on  his  brow  ; one  who  did  not  fight  was  not 
esteemed,  he  lost  his  status,  as  being  unable  to  distinguish 
himself  or  defend  his  people.  Another  great  sign  of  a 
chief  was  oratory — a good  orator  was  compared  to  the 
korimako,  the  sweetest  singing  bird  of  New  Zealand ; to 
enable  the  young  chief  to  become  one,  he  was  fed  upon 
that  bird,  so  that  he  might  the  better  acquire  its  qualities, 
and  the  successful  orator  was  termed  a korimako ; when 
he  harangued  his  people  he  walked  up  and  down  in  the 
marae,  a distance  of  about  thirty  feet,  as  he  approached  he 
spoke,  using  much  gesticulation,  slapping  his  sides,  brand- 
ishing his  weapon ; and  assuming  a grandiloquent  tone  of 
voice,  walked  slowly  back  in  a very  dignified  manner ; 
then  he  quickened  his  pace  and  returned,  and  with  the 
most  violent  gesticulation  and  movement  of  body  hurled 
defiance  at  his  enemies.*  Maniatepoto,  the  head  chief  of 
Taupo,  not  being  distinguished  either  by  his  courage  or 
oratory,  sank  down  into  comparative  insignificance,  and  Te 
Heuheu,  an  inferior  chief,  possessing  all  the  qualities  of  a 
great  one,  became  the  head. 

In  later  times,  the  eating  of  human  flesh  became  the  ruling 
desire  and  the  chief  incentive  to  war ; this  unnatural  food 
was  supposed  to  impart  additional  courage  and  ferocity  to 
those  who  partook  of  it,  and  likewise  to  make  their  triumph 
over  their  enemies  complete ; nor  must  the  love  of  plunder- 
ing their  foes,  and  despoiling  them  of  their  most  valued 
property,  their  wives,  highly-prized  green  stone  meres  and 
jpounamuj  jade  ornaments,  beautifully- wrought  mats,  carved 
weapons,  stores  of  food,  and  women,  be  overlooked.  All 
these  circumstances  combined  to  make  war  a delight,  render 
the  chief  great,  and  destroy  all  feelings  of  compunction,  if 
they  ever  had  any. 

Another  reason  may  be  assigned ; a chief  must  be  a 

* During  this  sad  war  a Taranaki  chief,  whilst  thus  trying  to  excite  the 
people  to  exterminate  the  Europeans  and  drive  them  into  the  sea,  dropped 
down  dead  ; at  another  meeting  a similar  death  occurred. 


A A 


354 


CHIEFS. 


travelled  man,  the  Maories  appear  to  have  had  a natural 
love  of  it,  and  yet  this  could  only  be  indulged  by  making 
war  on  the  parts  they  wanted  to  visit.  Such  was  their 
divided  state  in  former  times,  that  not  only  was  there  no 
intercourse  between  neighbouring  tribes,  but  little  or  none 
amongst  the  different  hapus  or  their  subdivisions ; even 
in  times  of  peace  they  could  not  visit  one  another,  ex- 
cept in  very  large  parties,  and  then  by  express  invitation, 
and  in  such  cases  there  was  much  danger  of  treachery. 
To  go  to  a different  part  of  the  country,  was  almost 
equivalent  to  attacking  it,  and  this  had  another  advantage, 
that  of  making  their  travelling  pay  its  own  expenses. 
Eoads  were  formed  by  chiefs  in  their  raids,  and  were 
generally  known  by  their  names,  as  Te  Ara  o Taraia,  the 
road  of  Taraia,  a dreaded  Thames  chief,  it  runs  from  the 
Murimotu  plains  to  Manawatu.  When  a visit  by  express 
invitation  was  paid,  a grand  feast  was  prepared  for  the 
guests,  large  presents  of  food  were  given  on  such  occa- 
sions, also  fine  mats,  meres,  and  other  ornaments;  these 
were  received  as  though  snatched  from  the  hands  of  an 
enemy,  kapo  rere,  as  a dog  seizes  a bone,  with  great 
delight ; still  a feast  of  this  kind  entailed  upon  the  re- 
ceivers the  obligation  of  returning  the  compliment,  with 
even  more  than  an  equivalent,  pare  mata,  at  some  future 
period,  for  the  Maori  had  no  such  thing  as  a free  gift. 
There  was  also  another  motive  for  visiting  a different  tribe, 
as  a friend  or  foe,  viz.,  to  add  to  the  number  of  his  wives, 
whom  he  either  took  by  force  or  demanded  of  the  tribe, 
whether  acquired  with  or  without  consent,  according  to 
the  lady^s  rank,  he  obtained  a hold  on  the  tribe,  and  his 
children  inherited  their  mother’s  lands ; if  the  lady  were 
freely  bestowed,  then  the  chief  became  one  of  her  hapu, 
and  would  have  to  reside  there  several  years,  at  any  rate 
until  the  lady  was  agreeable  to  change  her  abode;  but  more 
frequently  raids  were  made  for  this  express  purpose,  and  the 
females  were  carried  off  by  violence,  and  not  unfrequently 
killed  or  severely  wounded  in  the  struggle ; nothing  could 
be  done  without  the  semblance  of  war ; on  such  occasions 


TENURE  OF  LAND. 


355 


the  taua , war  party,  being  expected,  food  and  various  gar- 
ments were  placed  in  order  as  presents,  so  when  the  rush 
took  place,  they  were  taken  as  plunder,  and  all  terminated 
amicably.  The  head  chief  or  ariki  claimed  power  over 
widows,  and  placed  a price  upon  them  ; Pehi  Turoa 
demanded  two  cows  of  a youth  named  Ihakara,  for  his 
permission  to  marry  a handsome  young  widow,  he  com- 
plained afterwards  that  he  had  paid  too  much  for  the  lady, 
as  she  did  not  prove  worthy  of  so  high  a price. 

As  soon  as  spring  commenced  preparations  were  made  for 
some  raid  which  had  been  discussed  and  decided  upon  during 
the  winter  months,  in  fact  it  was  to  be  the  summer's  amuse- 
ment, just  as  a pleasure  excursion  is  planned ; and  when  the 
proper  season  arrived,  when  kings  go  forth  to  fight,"  they 
set  out  with  alacrity.  When  the  camp  was  formed,  a large 
shed  was  erected  for  the  taua , war  party,  this  was  called  he 
funi , in  imitation  of  the  whare  puni,  hot-house,  to  keep 
them  hot  for  the  fight. 

Tenure  of  Land. 

The  tenure  of  land  in  all  countries,  during  what  may  be 
called  their  patriarchal  age,  has  been  much  the  same,  each 
tribe  or  section  of  one,  has  had  its  own  particular  district, 
which  belongs  to  the  community  over  which  the  chief  exer- 
cises his  rnana , or  manorial  rights,  each  member  can  cultivate 
any  portion  of  it  he  thinks  fit,  if  unoccupied,  or  if  it  has  not 
been  previously  cultivated  by  another ; in  that  case  the 
family  of  the  first  cultivator  retains  certain  rights  over  it ; 
when  it  has  laid  in  fallow  sufficiently  long  to  become  re- 
newed or  fit  for  occupation,  that  person  or  his  children  can 
again  use  it,  in  fact,  it  is,  to  a certain  extent,  his  freehold, 
but  he  cannot  dispose  of  it  out  of  the  tribe  or  Hapu  to 
strangers  without  the  consent  of  the  entire  community,  and 
the  head  chief,  who  is  the  organ  of  any  such  change. 

In  a similar  way  rights  over  certain  fisheries  are  acquired ; 
when  families  unite  in  erecting,  Pa  tuna,  or  eel  weirs, 
which  are  laborious  works,  they  have  an  exclusive  right  over 

A A 2 


350 


TENURE  OF  LAND. 


them,  but  it  is  customary  for  a portion  of  the  fish  to  be  pre- 
sented to  the  head  chief.  Their  kumara  and  taro  grounds 
are  generally  contiguous,  and  divided  into  lands,  these  are 
also  carefully  marked  by  stones,  over  which  incantations 
have  been  uttered  which  render  them  so  sacred  that  to  move 
one  was  supposed  sufficient  to  cause  death.  But  hunting 
grounds,  though  the  boundaries  were  well  known,  being 
formed  by  rocks,  trees,  streams,  or  posts,  were  still  held  in 
common ; in  fact,  whilst  a race  is  in  its  patriarchal  state, 
land  has  only  a nominal  value. 

It  has  been  much  the  same  with  the  Maori  as  the  High- 
lander, and  Irish,  one  was  divided  into  Clans , the  other 
into  Septs,  every  individual  member  was  entitled  to  all  the 
privileges  of  his  clan  or  sept,  and  was  called  one  of  the 
children  of  the  chief,  assumed  his  name  or  that  of  the 
territory ; the  whole  district  was  held  in  common ; the  chief 
had  no  personal  property  in  the  sense  of  what  is  called 
hereditary,  even  a single  acre,  neither  had  the  members 
of  the  Sept.  The  whole  belonged  to  the  chief  and  people 
alike,  who  regarded  it  as  one  vast  common,  and  neither  he 
nor  they  could  alienate  any  portion,  each  held  a part  of  it 
for  life,  and  at  his  death,  instead  of  descending  to  his  sons, 
it  reverted  to  the  common  stock ; every  man  had  thus,  during 
life,  enough  to  cultivate  for  his  wants,  and  could  depasture 
cattle  where  he  pleased.  The  population  was  so  sparce  that 
there  was  more  land  than  required. 

The  chief  or  head  of  the  Sept  was  allowed  “ horse  meat 
and  man’s  meat/’  to  enable  him  to  receive  his  guests  with 
hospitality,  to  maintain  his  horsemen  and  footmen,  as  well 
as  all  his  retinue,  this  was  afterwards  called  coyne  and 
livery.  In  process  of  time  the  chief  increased  in  dignity 
and  wealth,  and  gradually  obtained  a permanent  hold  upon 
the  land  which  the  poorer  members  of  the  clan  or  sept  could 
not  hinder,  and  with  the  increase  of  population,  the  separa- 
tion between  him  and  his  retainers  became  wider  and  more 
marked,  until  at  last,  the  only  relation  remaining  between 
the  duke  and  the  peasant,  was  their  bearing  the  same  name ; 
even  the  commons  or  moors  themselves  became  the  sole 


TENURE  OF  LAND. 


357 


property  of  the  former,  and  that  which  was  not  required  for 
cultivation  he  retained  as  his  hunting  or  shooting  ground ; 
the  marked  distance  between  the  peasant  and  the  prince  led 
to  dissatisfaction  and  agrarian  violence. 

This  seems  to  be  what  is  naturally  likely  to  arise  when  the 
patriarchal  life  disappears  before  the  increase  of  population 
and  civilization,  especially  when  the  latter  only  applies  to  the 
chief,  and  the  tribe  still  continues  in  primseval  barbarism; 
the  introduction  of  a new  and  foreign  element  which  con- 
strains the  aboriginal  race  to  deflue  their  rights,  has  the 
effect  in  such  countries  as  New  Zealand  of  equalizing  rank 
and  sweeping  away  former  distinctions. 

In  new  lands,  where  moral  progress  has  been  far  more 
rapid  than  in  older  countries,  the  transition  from  savage  to 
civilized  life  appears  almost  too  rapid  to  be  stable  and  per- 
manent, still  this  is  not  confined  to  one  solitary  country,  it 
is  extending  over  the  whole,  it  is  the  world’s  progress. 

The  tenure  of  land  in  India  in  some  respects  resembled 
that  in  New  Zealand.  The  Ryot  was  allowed  to  cultivate  as 
much  as  he  liked,  which  was  considered  his  own  and  de- 
scended to  his  children,  for  which  he  paid  a certain  fixed 
tax  or  rent  per  annum,  the  fee  simple  of  the  land  being 
still  considered  vested  in  the  Crown,  but  in  former  days  sub- 
ject to  exactions,  which  he  has  escaped  under  the  British 
dominion,  he  now  pays  a fixed  trifling  sum  per  acre,  still 
the  land  is  not  considered  his  own,  but  is  held  under  a 
kind  of  perpetual  lease.  The  present  state,  however,  is  not 
a satisfactory  one  to  either  party,  a third  having  hitherto 
been  employed  to  gather  the  rent,  who  in  fact  farms  and 
makes  as  much  of  it  as  possible,  only  paying  the  sum  per  acre 
fixed  to  the  Government,  this  however  is  now  being  changed, 
and  a better  system  adopted.  So  in  New  Zealand,  whilst 
there  was  no  fixed  amount  received  by  the  chief,  he  claimed 
a right  over  the  property  of  every  one  less  powerful  than 
himself,  and  when  he  saw  anything  he  fancied  took  it. 

There  were  also  rights  of  another  kind ; in  former  times, 
it  was  almost  necessary  for  the  support  of  life  to  pay  a visit 
to  the  sea  coast  during  the  scarce  months ; thus  each  inland 


358 


TENURE  OF  LAND. 


tribe  claimed  a right  to  visit  the  sea  shore,  though  included 
in  another  tribe's  district,  and  even  to  have  a fishing  station 
close  to  those  of  others ; this  was  something  like  a part  of 
Durham  being  in  Yorkshire.  Even  amongst  the  high  chiefs 
there  was  a distinction  of  those  who  had  only  rank  and 
descent,  and  those  who  had  land  with  perhaps  a shorter 
pedigree  ; the  former  were  generally  interlopers  into  ano- 
ther's district,  who  though  tolerated  on  account  of  their  rank 
and  permitted  to  dwell  and  cultivate  land,  were  not  con- 
sidered entitled  to  claim  it  as  their  own ; they  were  viewed 
as  troublesome  neighbours,  whose  company  could  be  well 
dispensed  with ; this  was  the  case  with  the  Patutokotoko 
tribe  at  Wanganui,  which  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  the  Nga  ti 
Hau  ; there  were  always  misunderstandings  about  land,  the 
intruders  trying  to  establish  a claim,  the  owners  always 
resisting,  although  the  rank  of  their  chief  Turoa  kept  the 
others  from  coming  to  an  open  warfare,  especially  as  he  was 
supported  by  Te  Heuheu,  the  great  Taupo  chief. 

In  former  days,  cultivation  was  chiefly  carried  on  under  the 
superintendence  of  chiefs;  when  parties  of  visitors  arrived, 
they  were  conducted  to  the  marae,  or  court  in  front  of  the 
head  chief  or  ariki's  house,  and  on  such  occasions  a supply 
of  cooked  food  was  contributed  by  the  others,  in  proportion 
to  the  number  of  guests ; in  general  the  inhabitants  of  a pa 
had  their  meals  in  common  ; the  ariki  alone  taking  his  apart, 
being  a sacred  character. 

There  were  several  different  ways  of  acquiring  a right  to 
land.  A chief  had  a claim  on  the  spot  where  any  of  his 
relations  had  been  murdered,  or  even  killed  in  battle ; in 
this  way  Te  Rauparaha  and  Rangihaiata  claimed  a portion  of 
the  purchase-money  for  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound  when  sold 
to  the  Government. 

If  a tribe  had  been  driven  away  and  the  land  occupied, 
that  of  course  was  a valid  title,  and  the  former  owners  ceased 
to  have  any  further  claim  to  it,  unless  strong  enough  to 
reconquer  it.  The  Nga  ti  awa  were  driven  away  from  the 
Waitara  district  by  the  Waikatoes,  and  they  went  and  re- 
sided at  Waikanae  in  Cook's  Straits,  but  many  years  after- 


BARTER. 


359 


wards  when  Captain  Fitzroy  allowed  their  claim  to  their 
former  possessions,  they  again  returned  and  occupied  them  ; 
it  was  an  unfortunate  admission,  and  may  he  viewed  as  the 
primary  cause  of  the  present  sad  war. 

If  a tribe  had  been  conquered,  or  had  retreated  before 
their  enemies,  but  were  able  to  return  and  reoccupy  their 
lands,  their  enemies  had  no  claim  to  them,  unless  some  of 
them  returned  and  cultivated  any  part,  in  that  case  such 
would  individually  obtain  a right  to  a portion,  although  they 
did  not  constantly  reside  upon  it ; in  this  way  the  chief 
Taratoa  acquired  his  claim  in  the  Rangitikei  district,  through 
which  his  tribe  had  formerly  made  a hostile  raid ; he  was 
suffered  to  return  and  cultivate  there,  and  so  became  a pro- 
prietor in  common  with  its  ancient  owners. 

If  a tribe  be  permitted  to  reside  in  another  district  and 
build  a pa,  that  also  gave  a right ; thus,  when  Te  Paratehau 
and  his  party  retreated  from  the  Upper  Hutt,  and  were 
received  by  the  Rangitikei  natives,  and  built  Marama  i 
hoea,  they  thus  acquired  a claim  on  that  spot.  But  especially, 
should  a tribe  permit  the  chief  of  another  to  be  buried  in 
their  district,  his  relatives  obtained  a valid  claim,  to  be 
regarded  as  owners  in  common  to  the  lands  of  that  district; 
thus,  Pehi  obtained  a settlement  at  Pipiriki  ; Turoa  his 
father  was  allowed  to  be  interred  there,  and  from  that  day 
his  son  Pehi  became  the  possessor  of  the  best  part  of  it  as 
his  mara,  and  made  it  his  chief  abode.  In  fact,  there  were 
many  ways  of  acquiring  a right  to  land,  some  of  which, 
though  singular  to  us,  are  acknowledged  according  to  Maori 
custom,  as  giving  a valid  title. 

Barter. 

The  Maori  custom  in  this  respect  was  very  singular.  They 
had  no  money,  nor  did  they,  strictly  speaking,  barter,  but 
when  a friendly  party  visited  another,  whatever  they  took  a 
fancy  to  was  at  once  given,  however  much  it  might  be  prized 
by  the  owners,  and  nothing  was  said  about  recovering  com- 
pensation, still  it  was  fully  understood  that  one  must  be 


360 


BARTER. 


given  when  the  return  visit  was  paid ; then  they  in  like 
manner  would  have  anything  which  they  might  wish  for,  and 
they  always  took  care  to  obtain  the  full  value  of  the  presents 
they  had  previously  given  ; this  being  done,  it  was  under- 
stood that  they  were  rite , which  meant  the  account  between 
them  was  balanced. 

Hori  Patene,  before  he  engaged  in  war  with  the  Euro- 
peans, knew  that  the  Rotorua  natives  had  a large  quantity 
of  powder.  He  and  his  people  set  to  and  worked  half-a- 
dozen  green  stone  meres,  which  are  highly  prized ; these 
required  the  incessant  labor  of  the  entire  population  of  Pipi- 
riki  for  nearly  a year,  when  finished  the  Rotoruas  were 
invited  to  a hakari , or  feast,  on  their  arrival  they  were 
presented  with  these  green  stone  meres ; after  some  time  a 
return  visit  was  paid,  and  they  demanded  a large  supply  of 
powder,  which  was  given,  that  the  account  might  be  settled. 

In  the  early  days,  when  everything  which  the  European 
possessed  was  new  to  the  Maori,  he  often  set  a most  extra- 
ordinary value  on  things,  which  to  Europeans  were  of  very 
little  importance,  and  would  offer  many  times  more  than  an 
equivalent  for  any  object  which  he  coveted ; thus  the  early 
traders  reaped  enormous  profits,  until  the  value  of  articles 
became  better  understood,  and  now  they  are  as  capable  of 
making  a good  bargain  as  the  Europeans  themselves. 


HE  KO,  OR  NATIVE  SPADE. 


PAPAROA,  A RAPID  OF  THE  WANGANUI  RIVER. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


SEASONS— NGA  TAKAPOU. 


Spring  is  called  Te  aro  aro,  Mahana,  and  Te  Toru  ; Summer, 
Raumati,  Waru,  Reh.ua;  Autumn,  Ngahuru,  Matiti;  Winter, 
Hotoke,  Puanga. 

Spring  is  literally  the  season  of  growth,  Summer  is  that 
of  sunshine,  Autumn  of  increase,  augeo,  or  fertility.  Winter 
that  of  the  storm,  wind,  and  tempest.  All  languages  seem 
to  possess  equivalent  terms  ; zif,  the  name  of  the  second 
Hebrew  month,  or  from  the  new  moon  of  May  to  that  of 
June,  signifies  literally  “ the  splendor  of  flowers”;  choreph, 
the  name  for  autumn,  the  gathering  season  or  time  of 
harvest  and  fruits.  In  a similar  way,  the  Maori  word  Toru 
signifies  the  shooting  or  springing  forth  of  plants;  so  also 
the  word  Aroaro.  Mahan  a is  the  season  of  warmth,  Rau- 


362 


SEASONS NGA  TAKAPOU. 


mati  dead  leaves,  as  all  the  trees  with  one  exception  are 
evergreen,  and  only  shed  their  leaves  in  summer.  Ho  tohe , 
or  winter,  the  season  when  the  moist  earth  gives  forth  her 
worms. 

The  different  seasons  of  the  year  are  marked  by  the  rising 
of  stars,  and  counted  by  the  moons.  The  year  commences 
with  the  first  new  moon,  after  the  star  Puanga  is  seen  in  the 
morning,  which  is  in  June  : — 

Moon. 

1.  June. — Puanga  ; this  is  the  great  winter  star.  Matariki, 

Tapuapua,  Waka  ahu  Te  Ra  o Tainui,  these  also  are  in 
the  ascendant.  The  shortest  day  ; Matariki  is  also  one 
of  the  great  winter  stars. 

2.  July. — Wakaau,  Wakaahu  nuku,  Wakaahu  rangi,  Waka- 

ahu  papa,  Wakaahu  kerekere,  Kopu  and  Tautoru. 

8.  August. — Taka-pou-poto,  Mangere,  Kaiwaka.  Spring  com- 
mences. The  Karaka  and  Hou  flower. 

4.  September. — Takapou-tawahi.  It  begins  to  be  warm  ; cul- 

tivation commences  ; the  Kowai,  Kotuku  tuku,  and 
Rangiora  flower  ; a rainy  month. 

5.  October. — The  kumara  is  planted  ; the  tawera  is  ripe  ; the 

cuckoo  Koekoea  arrives  ; the  windy  month,  correspond- 
ing with  our  March,  hence  the  saying,  te  rakihi,  the  noisy 
or  windy  period. 

6.  November. — Te  Wakumu  ; the  Rewarewa  flowers. 

7.  December. — Nga  Tapuae  ; the  Rata  flowers. 

8.  January. — Uruao  Rangawhenua  ; Rehua  is  the  great  sum- 

mer star  ; the  star  Rangawhenua,  an  ancestor,  is  said  to 
rule  the  days,  and  Uruao  the  nights  of  this  month  ; the 
Karaka  flowers. 

9.  February. — Rehua,  Ko  Ruruau  ; the  dry  and  scarce  month. 

10.  March. — Rehua,  Matiti,  Ngahuru  ; the  harvest  month  for 

the  kumara. 

11.  April. — Te  Kahui-rua-mahu  ; the  days  grow  cold,  the  cuckoo 

leaves. 


SEASONS NGA  TAKAPOU. 


363 


12.  May. — Kai  waka,  Patu-tahi  matariki ; the  winter  star  Koero, 

the  chief  star  of  this  month. 

13.  Tahi  ngungu ; grumbling  month,  little  food,  bad  weather, 

smoky  houses,  watery  eyes,  constant  quarrels. 


The  Maori  constellations  are  very  interesting* ; they  have 
not  only  names  for  all  the  principal  stars,  but  also  have 
formed  them  into  constellations,  the  chief  of  these  is  Te 
Waka  o Tamarereti,  the  canoe  of  Tamar erete. 

1.  Te  waka  (canoe.) 

2.  Ko  Tautoru,  te  Rapa  (stern.) 

8.  Ko  Matariki  Te  Ihu,  or  prow. 

4.  Te  Toke  o te  waka,  mast. 

5.  Te  oe,  paddle. 

6.  The  Tata,  the  baler. 

7.  Te  Taura,  the  cable,  [cross. 

8.  Te  Punga,  anchor,  southern 

9.  Te  Ra  o Tainui  Waka  witi — l 8 

sail. 


This  beautiful  constellation  takes  in  Tautoru,  the  four  stars 
of  orion’s  belt,  which  form  the  stern,  and  matariki,  which 
forms  the  prow,  whilst  the  mast  is  te  ra  o tainui,  and  the  sail 
te  wakawhiti.  The  taura,  or  cable,  are  formed  by  the  two 
indicators,  and  the  punga,  anchor,  is  the  southern  cross,  or 
happy  omen  for  the  Maori  canoe,  that  it  has  for  its  anchor 
the  cross,  which  will  be  its  stay  in  every  storm,  and  save  it 
from  shipwreck.  The  baler  and  paddle  I suppose  are  stowed 
away  inside  the  canoe. 

II. — Te  Tulce  o Maui,  the  elbow  of  Maui,  orion's  belt. 

III.  — Te  whare  o te  Wliiu,  the  house  of  Te  Whiu  and  his 

two  slaves.  The  star  scorpio. 

IV. — Te  Paejoae  o Waitiri.  1.  Te  pou  tuatahi,  Ko 

Wakamaro  te  Rangi.  2.  Te  poutuarua.  Mere- 
mere. 

Y. — Te  wakopa  o te  Rangi.  The  garment  of  Maru, 
which  he  let  fall  as  he  ascended  up  into  heaven. 


364 


TIME. 


VI. — Hawio  te  toke  o Turi. 

VII. — Waka  mauruiho  and  Wakamanruake.  These  are 
the  husbands  of  Hurike  and  Angake,  and  their 
daughters  are  Tioreore,  the  larger  magellan 
cloudy  and  Tikatakata  the  lesser  one,  and  Tai- 
keha  and  Ninikuru  are  their  husbands.  Ko  te 
rangi  mata  nguku  syn  Tikatakata.  The  natives 
state  they  know  what  quarter  the  wind  will  blow 
from,  by  the  position  of  the  magellan  clouds. 

VIII. — Mongoroiata,  milky  way,  syn  mangoroa.  When 
distinctly  seen  it  is  a sign  of  a fruitless  season. 
The  milky  way  was  a great  taniwa,  or  reptile 
god,  who  has  a large  canoe  on  the  other  side  of 
heaven  called  Kanetaka,  having  a man  on  board 
named  Pupuki. 

IX. — Nga  wata.  This  star  belongs  to  Nga  tuke  a Tai- 
toru  nana  i takiri  te  ra  te  marama. 


Time. 

The  New  Zealanders,  in  former  times,  had  no  names 
for  days,  but  only  for  nights ; it  was  by  moons  and  stars 
they  counted  Time  : perhaps  this  was  handed  down  from 
remotest  times,  or  arose  from  the  idea  that  it  was  in  the 
night  everything  grew ; they  have  therefore  names  for  the 
different  nights  of  the  moon  ; for  they  were  indeed  the  chil- 
dren of  the  night,  and  not  of  the  day,  and  in  this  respect 
resembled  the  other  islanders  of  the  South  Seas,  who  had  a 
similar  way  of  reckoning,  but  it  appears  remarkable  that 
they  should  not  have  a single  name  for  any  day  in  the  year. 
These  names  also  denote  the  state  of  the  tide.  They  chiefly 
counted  the  moons  by  different  stars  as  they  were  in  the 
ascendant. 

Summer  is  named  Raumati  dead  leaves,  from  its  being 
the  season  when  they  fall ; there  being  but  one  deciduous 
tree  in  New  Zealand,  the  ho  hutuhutu,  or  New  Zealand 


TIME. 


365 


fuschia,  which  sheds  its  leaves  in  winter;  for,  if  possible, 
the  forest  is  more  verdant  in  that  season  than  in  summer. 

Winter  is  called  HotoJce , or  the  season  when,  from  the 
increased  moisture,  the  earth  gives  up  its  worms,  which 
formerly  were  highly  prized  as  food,  some  attaining  a very 
large  size. 

Since  the  introduction  of  Christianity,  the  natives  have 
given  particular  names  to  three  of  the  week  days,  which  are 
now  generally  used  throughout  the  country.  According  to 
their  nomenclature,  Sunday  is  called  Te  Wild,  the  week,  most 
probably  because  it  commences  with  that  day,  which  thus, 
by  way  of  distinction,  is  designated  the  week,  Saturday  is 
named  Te  ra  horoi , or  the  washing  and  cleaning-up  day, 
from  their  noticing  the  custom  in  all  European  houses  of 
thus  employing  that  day.  Friday  is  called  Te  ra  oka , or  the 
bleeding  day.  I was  along  time  before  I could  discover  the 
origin  of  this  name,  but  found  that  it  is  derived  from  the 
European  custom  of  killing  their  pigs  on  the  Friday,  so  as  to 
have  time  to  cut  them  up  on  the  Saturday,  and  dispose 
of  them  before  the  Sabbath.  The  custom  of  bleeding  ani- 
mals, which  is  or  ought  to  be  general  amongst  us  as  Chris- 
tians, struck  the  natives  with  the  greatest  astonishment, 
that  the  blood  which  they  esteem  so  highly,  should  thus 
be  wasted ; they  have  therefore  commemorated  the  circum- 
stance by  giving  the  name  of  Te  ra  oka , to  this  pig-killing 
day.  The  remaining  days  of  the  week  still  preserve  their 
naturalized  names,  viz.,  Manei,  Turei,  Wenerei,  Tairei. 

The  Maori  rather  vary  in  the  names  given  for  the  nights 
of  the  moon,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  six  lists, 
which  belong  to  different  tribes.  The  first  two  nights  are 
those  when  the  moon  is  invisible ; these  names  also  denote 
the  state  of  the  tide  : — 


p • <L> 

* ' <n 

g-sa 

|Ki 

2 0 

r*  £ £ ! 

§ *5j  § tuo 
§P  g.S 

s <u  C <D 

JK  Pj  JB  P 
H H 


p < o ^ 

| 

3iMsi 

of^.2^  bf 

'M  U - bjOp  d 

§:as  » 

'g°3  1 $ s 

2 o WJ  w 

^4-  oj-G-C 


£ . 

2 o 

tuO^ 


I,  W .52  -J'.G  10  P 

<5  rsp  g b/ 

P « $ £ u P 

ru  0.2  _; 

3 -5  a Z 2 ^ p - 
3 ® "H  3 2 d g 

3 f-i  „.  j'  d i?  "P  2 
\ CD  C ,M  f-?  r-3  O 
i > pEj  d)  ^ 2 ^ d 
; O - S!  «!  j;  S 

1 tut)!-!  1—1  *' 

c 3 


d C/2 


<U  0)  £ 

W 3p 


OJ 


p p 
o d 

° 2 

3 cu 

(D  P 
P -*-' 

H 


p . 

3 d 

3 "3 

<u  o 

ffi 


•h  d A 

■%  g.3 


S3  O 
P P 


. <u  g ,2 
§ § 


ooo  2 g g<<Effi§^0<t1 

>-<D(D§Spcu<u<ua><D't><u 

KKhhhSSSKKKK 


cS3  CD  P 
g cl 

1§3^ 

H gSH 

<D  P <U  4) 

w ffiw 


4>  .rl 

.2 

,P  ^ 

P 

g 2 

3 

o 

3 o? 
g 2 p -| 

• s ° 

d <u  3 ^ 

>H 

d 

bJ3 

d d d § . 

d d d 3 bjQ’G 

jp  ,2  ^ o 

P 

d 

O o O P g P 

a b a is  § .2 

5^  SP 

CD  <u  W 0) 

MM  M 


§3  &)  goo  ^ 3 

§ § a « p « ,2 

H H H K K ffi  ffi 


Oh 

d 

P 

'3 

o 

£ 


S3 

Ph 

d 

P 

d 

"d 

d 

H 


I 


S § 

O flj 

P S3 


3 g 

oo  gl  |£'Se  |ffi<3 

Kffi^HOKKK^KKffi 


d £ 

g-a 

lH 

£ 


. o 
d P 
P £ 
33  o 

op 

<D  <u 

ffi  K 


S3  O 

O 


6 • 


d p 

° o 


So’g  I 

g g 1 


O ■ n u 3 3 ^ w O ^ 

P P ^ ^ So  bjoP 

''*■-■  M 3 §««««« 

H H P ffi  ffi  ffi  Mh 


OJr^ 

ffi 


Ph 

d 

rS 

‘3 

o 


p 

. • rH  d 

4)  d 

d ^ 

3 i3  - -2 

. ^ d B r3  d 

o S3  5 4>  g 2d 

6 2 g ^ c3  rd  ..jgw 

.^2  g ^ 3hp  s:  ^ 

OMOMHpMM^M^O 


3 3 


p 2 
p 3 

3 

3 

Jh 

p p 

d d 

2 3 

d rP 

6 

ctip. 

HO 

si 

o 

Oh 

d 

£ 

•£ 

o 

"u 

O 


d 


O O . 

P P O • 

d ra  ,5  D 


S3 

§ S3 
So  bO^  g b/3'§  S 

§ §j9l  §! - 
hHMOM^O 


S3 

8* 

rW 


}P  d 


S3 

• 3 ° 
•p  5 p 
'B  <u  d 
c3  > _v! 


o -rt  fp  ^3r3  3 d'Sb  £ 

Jz;  [M  ^ ooohM^ia^M^K<;  o 


£ w 

O rP 


e 

d 

^ d d 
' g S3 


'3  3 3 

g d d.3 

d d 

OPi  P4H 


d 

d 

H 


32 

S3  O 


c3  c5  »h 

£ 2 . . § 
§>§C2  « §>’§ 

§ §.2  2 oo 

HHMOP4S 


p 

d 

P! 

‘3 

O 

£ 


S3 

P 

d 

d 


P 

>-3  P 


. 2 

3 c $ i A 

rPd^d^P'CPPd^B 

OO^h^iM^MM^^O 


. p S .p  p 

d Mjjg  d 
±2  C ^ d ^aS 
4>  P -H  d • • 


■p  3 
p 3 
p p 

d d 
rP  ^Sj 
d d 

Pi  P 


S3 

2 d 

® r— I _2d 

HO 


1 3 

^ d 

O d ‘P  3 

0.2  o . I .2 

^ g a 6 ^ g Sop  g 

o Ongo.2  2 o og 

P HPPOP^O 


p - 
d 4> 
rS  d 
P g 
o s 


I § 

I i 

p „ 
d O 
_i<5 

d d 


O d 

1? 
-<  o 


.O  -pi 


p .g 


p 

o 

P o 


!>  d 
p Pi 

'd  v0/  US  £ •"£!  2 P 


3 3 . J^-rf 
. p p d 2 ^ 3 
_ ^’GPopS^d 

ddjcucucucucuajajtu 

^kmmmmmmmm 


2 

p 

20 

^ n * 


•si 

p d 
P rP 
d d 

^ ^-go 

MM^hh 


cM 


l 

d d 

1 8 

P 

^ d 

2 

o 

P d n- 

O . 2 •§ 

4> 

'o  o SjP 

O 

o 

’3  3 

P5 

§o"g  3 
o op 


p p 


vnvo  t^OO  AO  « N 'p 


t^oo 


as  O 
- w 


FIRE. 


367 


Fire. 

In  civilized  life  few  are  aware  of  the  blessing  they  enjoy 
in  possessing  the  power  of  obtaining  fire  with  the  greatest 
facility.  The  shipwrecked  mariner  on  a desert  island,  and 
the  traveller  through  the  wilderness,  in  the  cold  climes  of 
the  north,  know  how  to  appreciate  the  power  of  obtaining 
it,  and  the  anxiety  felt  whilst  the  operation  is  going  on,  on 
which  perhaps  even  life  itself  depends. 

Even  in  Australia,  with  its  warm  climate,  the  native  shows  the 
value  he  puts  upon  it,  by  the  care  taken  of  it  when  obtained, 
he  has  always  his  fire-stick  with  him,  and  woe  be  to  his  gin 
if  she  permits  it  to  go  out ; on  the  western  coast,  the  best  way 
which  the  Australian  native  has  of  preserving  this  element 
so  essential  to  his  comfort,  is  to  collect  the  seed  stems  or 
stalks  of  the  Banksias,  or  rather  the  abortive  ones,  these  are 
denuded  of  their  outer  coverings,  leaving  a dark  brown 
velvety-looking  centre,  which  is  very  retentive  of  fire,  and 
burns  slowly,  so  that  one  of  these  little  fire-sticks,  which  is 
only  eight  inches  long  will  last  for  a considerable  time,  a bag 
of  them  will  suffice  for  an  entire  day. 

The  Maori  calls  the  process  of  making  fire  by  friction, 
Kauoti ; he  bids  you  me  ika  he  alii , obtain  fire  ; it  is  inter- 
esting to  compare  the  various  modes  of  producing  fire  in 
different  times  and  places ; the  old  way  has  disappeared 
during  the  present  generation  ; the  flint  and  steel  which,  pro- 
bably had  been  used  from  the  remotest  times,  even  from  the 
first  discovery  of  iron,  has  at  last  given  way  to  the  lucifer 
and  other  matches ; but  our  forefathers  were  likewise  ac- 
quainted with  the  still  more  ancient  and  primitive  way  of 
rubbing  two  pieces  of  wood  together ; the  friction  of  branches 
in  a gale  has  caused  trees  to  take  fire,  and  might  have  taught 
man  the  way  of  procuring  it ; this  has  occurred  in  the  New 
Zealand  forests. 

But  different  nations  varied  in  their  way  of  producing  it 
even  by  this  simple  method ; the  Mexican  obtained  it  by 
causing  a circular  plate  of  wood  to  revolve  on  a pointed  stick ; 


368 


FIRE. 


they  also  made  it  by  twirling  a stick  in  a piece  of  wood 
laid  on  the  ground ; this  was  nearly  the  plan  adopted  by 
the  Australians,  who  make  a pointed  staff  revolve  in  their 
hands  in  a hole  of  another  laid  on  the  ground,  and  held 
firm  by  the  foot.  The  Japanese  did  the  same,  and  also  the 
Maori  is  said  to  have  done  so,  but  this  statement  made  by 
Nicholas,  an  early  writer  on  New  Zealand,  appears  to  be  a mis- 
take, as  the  author  has  seen  the  process  performed  in  different 
parts  of  the  island,  but  never  in  that  way ; the  ordinary 
one  being  by  rubbing  or  rather  pushing  a wedge-shaped 
piece  of  wood  forward  and  backward  along  a groove,  and 
collecting  the  charred  dust  at  its  extremity  until  it  ignited, 
it  was  then  placed  in  a lump  of  soft  flax,  and  waved  to  and 
fro,  when  it  burst  out  into  a flame. 

The  dyaks  of  Borneo  use  a bow  and  string,  to  cause  a 
pointed  stick  to  revolve  on  a piece  of  wood,  which  is  a step 
beyond  the  Australian ; this  plan  produces  an  accelerated 
motion  without  increasing  the  labour,  which  by  ordinary 
rubbing  is  very  great,  and  often  requires  to  be  kept  up  by 
several  succeeding  one  another ; some  tribes  have  simply  a 
cord  tied  round  the  stick,  by  pulling  first  one  end  and  then 
the  other,  it  is  made  to  revolve  backwards  and  forwards  with 
considerable  velocity. 

Probably  the  difficulty  of  procuring  fire  in  the  earliest 
times  led  to  the  institution  of  custodians,  and  afterwards 
vestal  virgins,  it  thus  in  time  became  connected  with  fire 
worship  and  adoration  of  the  sun,  when  it  was  the  duty  of 
those  appointed  to  watch  the  sacred  flame. 

The  ancient  Peruvians  kindled  their  sacred  fire  by  fric- 
tion ; the  Brahmins  to  this  day  obtain  it  by  drilling  one 
piece  of  arani  wood  into  another ; in  the  ancient  Sanscrit  the 
name  of  the  fire-drill  stick  is  Pramantha,  which  recalls  the 
legend  of  Prometheus  ; the  great  eastern  god,  Baal,  was  a 
sun  god,  and  thus  Elijah  took  the  priests  of  Baal  on  their 
own  ground,  when  he  dared  them  to  a public  trial.  “ The 
God  who  answereth  by  fire.  He  is  the  God”;  he  granted 
them  every  opportunity  of  testing  the  power  of  their  sun 
god,  giving  them  the  entire  day  when  they  had  all  the  heat 


FIRE. 


369 


of  that  luminary,  then  at  sun  down  he  offered  his  sacrifice, 
and  called  upon  the  Lord  to  answer  it  by  fire,  showing  that 
he  did  not  depend  in  the  least  on  natural  means,  but  solely 
on  the  power  of  Jehovah. 

It  is  deeply  interesting  to  find  that  the  name  by  which  that 
spot  is  still  known  in  Palestine  is  Mohrakaha,  the  place  of 
the  burning,*  and  it  is  still  more  so  to  find  that  it  has  pre- 
cisely the  same  meaning  in  Maori,  Mo  ra  ha  ha,  being  literally 
in  that  language,  for  the  sun  to  consume  with  his  breath ; 
another  word  used  in  scripture  seems  to  bear  on  the  above, 
Raca,  which  our  Saviour  says  it  is  wicked  to  use  is  in 
fact  a great  heathen  curse,  Raka  being  in  Maori,  may  the 
sun  smite  thee,  or  may  Baal  burn  thee  up  or  consume  thee.-” 
A curse  which,  in  New  Zealand,  would  once  have  endangered 
the  life  of  the  person  who  uttered  it. 

Baal  fires  are  still  kindled.  Reiske  saw  them  in  Germany 
200  years  ago ; he  says  : “ When  a murrain  has  broken  out 
among  the  great  and  small  cattle,  and  the  herds  have  suf- 
fered much  harm,  the  farmers  make  a c need  fire 3 on  an 
appointed  day,  all  other  fires  are  extinguished  in  the  village, 
from  each  house  fuel  is  fetched.  A stout  oak  post  is  driven 
into  the  ground,  and  a hole  bored  through  it ; in  this  a 
wooden  windlass  is  stuck,  well  smeared  with  pitch  and  tar, 
and  turned  round  so  long  that  at  last  it  catches  fire ; this 
is  communicated  to  the  other  materials,  a f need  fire ’ is  made, 
and  the  cattle  are  driven  between  two  fires  thus  kindled.” 
The  Baal  or  beltane  fires  are  still  kindled  on  every  hill  top  in 
some  parts  of  Brittany  and  Ireland ; the  people  dance  madly 
round,  then  leap  through  them,  and  snatching  flaming  brands 
wave  the  fire  over  their  bodies  exactly  as  in  the  pagan 
mysteries.f 

The  pretended  miraculous  kindling  of  the  holy  fire,  from 
the  reputed  sepulchre  of  our  Lord  at  Jerusalem,  when  the 
Greek  patriarch  conveys  it  to  those  near  him,  they  to  others, 

* J.  Macgregor  of  the  “ Rob  Roy.” — Visit  to  Palestine. 

f The  celebrated  round  towers  of  Ireland,  called  Turagan,  seem  likewise  tc 
indicate  Baal  worship.  Tur  tower,  agan  aghni  (Sanscrit)  ahi  (Maori)  fire. 


B B 


370 


TIRE. 


and  the  excited  crowd,  like  madmen,  strip  their  bodies  to 
wave  their  lighted  candles  over  them  is  exactly  similar,  still 
stranger  is  it  to  learn  that  this  most  ancient  heathen  custom 
exists  even  yet  in  Cumberland. 

The  Esquimaux  strike  together  lumps  of  iron  pyrites  and 
flint  stones,  catching  the  sparks  in  dry  moss.  Such  f strike 
lights  ’ of  magnetic  iron  ore  have  been  found  in  Swiss  lake 
dwellings.* 

What  an  advance  has  been  made  by  man  since  fire  was 
obliged  to  be  obtained  by  the  laborious  operation  of  rubbing 
two  sticks  together,  to  the  latest  phosphorus  compounds,  the 
Greek  or  Fenian  Fire.  When  Du  Chaillu  watched  a group  of 
Africans,  who  had  never  before  seen  a white  man,  trying  to 
obtain  a spark  by  friction,  he  filled  them  with  terror  by 
instantly  striking  a light  with  a lucifer  match ; the  Maori 
in  a similar  way  expressed  his  astonishment  when  he  first 
witnessed  a lucifer  match,  and  called  it  takiri,  to  dart  as 
lightning ; what  an  enormous  advance  in  civilization  did 
that  match  represent,  and  how  much  of  it  has  been  gained 
in  the  present  generation  ! 

The  various  expressions  used  for  fire,  and  relating  to  the 
procuring  of  it  amongst  the  Maori  are  interesting  as  showing 
the  value  attached  to  it.  Kora,  kapura,  ahi,  mapura,  maute, 
ngiha,  pahunu,  mura,  kanaka,  all  mean  fire ; the  last  word 
kanaka  also  signifies  man  in  the  Sandwich  Isles,  and  is  the 
same  as  tangata  in  Maori. 

Kauati  and  kaureureu  are  names  for  the  stick  used  in  rub- 
bing, rororu  for  both  sticks  thus  used.  Para  is  the  dust 
caused  by  rubbing ; kauoti,  the  name  given  to  the  process 
of  friction,  pukuroa  the  flame  thus  produced,  literally  the 
“ long  stomach,”-  referring  to  its  great  power  of  expansion, 
or  the  long  groove  in  which  it  is  made,  perhaps  the  name  of 
a god,  hence  the  saying,  Me  oioi  hi  te  ringa  ringa  ha  puta  te 
tama  Ujpuku  roa , wave  the  dust  to  and  fro  in  the  hand  and 
the  child  upuku  roa  will  spring  forth  in  the  flame.  Mauika, 
the  god  of  fire,  was  said  to  have  it  in  his  fingers,  probably  an 

* From  a paper  by  Mr.  Newton  on  fire,  as  an  agent  of  civilization. 

Mm 


MEASURES. 


371 


allusion  to  the  way  of  procuring  it,  and  when  Maui  asked  him 
for  fire  he  gave  him  one  of  his  fingers,  implying  that  was  the 
way  of  obtaining  it.  (See  the  myth  of  Mauika.) 

Measures. 

The  grain  of  wheat  appears  to  be  the  foundation  of  most 
of  our  English  weights  and  measures,  so  many  grains  making 
a penny  weight,  and  so  many  penny  weights  an  ounce ; so 
likewise  in  long  measure,  three  grains  making  an  inch, 
the  smallest  measure  of  distance ; some  are  derived  from 
the  members  of  the  body,  as  a finger’s  length,  and  eight 
finger  lengths  one  yard,  the  palm,  hand  breadth,  span,  stride 
pace,  and  foot ; it  is  probable  that  anciently  this  was  the  case 
with  most  nations,  thus  the  Hebrew  cubit ; it  is  still  so  with 
the  Maori ; they  have,  like  us,  the  aohanga  and  aowanga,  a 
handful.  The  kotahiwanga,  a span,  or  stride  ; the  watianga, 
the  length  of  the  arm,  from  the  end  of  the  middle  finger  to 
the  elbow,  the  cubit,  literally  in  Maori,  the  breaking  of  the 
elbow ; the  tika,  either  the  body  extended  on  the  ground 
from  the  great  toe  to  the  middle  finger,  or  the  extent  of  the 
two  arms  stretched  out,  this  is  generally  considered  as  six 
feet  or  a fathom ; the  kumi  is  ten  tika  or  sixty  feet,  it  is  also 
a fathom ; the  maro  is  properly  both  arms  extended,  some 
times  it  is  only  a yard  or  even  a span ; wahanga , the  arm's 
length  to  the  middle  of  the  breast  or  half  a tika  ; waroro  and 
warona,  one  step  forward,  or  a pace  ; te  keke  the  length 
of  the  arm ; teke  teke  one  arm's  length,  the  width  of  the 
breast  and  half  the  other  arm ; the  tikarere  one  out  stretch, 
and  a little3  more  ; the  pokoiwi  from  the  end  of  the  middle 
finger  to  the  shoulder.  Measuring  magnitude  as  the  girth 
of  a tree  was  naturally  by  the  arm ; thus  the  paetahi  is  as 
much  as  can  be  grasped  with  both  arms ; pae  rua  hamama 
te  torn,  two  girths,  the  third  open  or  not  complete,  that  is 
two  and  a half.  For  weight  there  was  no  particular  measure, 
only  such  as  tai  maha  heavy,  mama  light;  as  in  distance, 
tawiti  far  off,  mamao  distant,  tata  near,  as  they  had  no  grain 
there  was  only  the  paihere , a bundle  of  flax  or  raupo. 

b b 2 


372 


KORO  MATTTA. 


Koro  Matua — The  Thumb,  or  Great  Toe. 

The  advocates  of  the  progressive  development  theory  of 
the  human  race  and  its  Simian  origin,  might  be  led  to 
view  this  as  a proof  of  the  fact,  that  there  is  but  one  word 
in  the  Maori  for  the  thumb  and  great  toe,  and  also  the 
same  for  fingers  and  toes,  koro  applying  equally  to  both, 
thus,  koromatua  is  the  thumb  or  great  toe,  and  koro  iti  the 
little  finger  and  toe  as  well ; before  the  natives  wore  shoes 
they  had  almost  as  much  command  over  their  toes  as  fingers, 
and  could  lay  hold  of  substances  with  them,  and  pick  up  any- 
thing with  ease. 


HE  TAIAHA,  OR  CHIEF’S  STAFF. 


A NATIVE  SCHOOL. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


LANGUAGE. 

Language  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  principal  aids 
in  discovering  the  origin  of  such  a remote  and  isolated 
race  as  that  of  the  Maori ; it  is  likewise  an  historical  record 
which  cannot  be  easily  falsified ; as  we  recognize  a friend  by 
his  voice,  however  greatly  the  person  may  be  changed  by 
age,  or  other  cause,  so  may  we  identify  races,  however 
altered  their  manners,  customs,  and  character  in  the  long 
role  of  ages. 

It  is  one  of  the  surest  ways  of  ascertaining  the  remote 
ancestry  of  a people ; form  and  feature  may  change,  so  that 
the  resemblance  of  those  sprung  from  the  same  stock  by 
frequent  foreign  admixture  may  be  lost,  but  in  language 


374 


LANGUAGE. 


there  are  always  some  remains  left  to  rediscover  wliat  has 
disappeared  from  traditional  memory. 

The  character  of  language  seems  to  be  greatly  influenced 
by  climate,  and  to  change  with  alteration  of  locality.  The 
milder  the  climate  the  more  euphonious  the  tongue  ; harsh 
gutterals  and  numerous  consonants  indicate  cold  and  fre- 
quent fogs  ; exceptions  to  this  rule  seem  to  prove  that 
those  who  have  them  came  at  no  distant  period  from  other 
regions ; soft  sounding  tongues,  abounding  in  vowels,  ap- 
pear to  mark  a mild  and  genial  temperature,  yet  whilst  this 
is  the  case  with  that  of  New  Zealand,  which  abounds  in 
vowels,  it  is  often  spoken  with  a harsh  intonation.  Change 
of  temperature  will,  in  some  measure,  account  for  the  dif- 
ferent dialects  which  exist  amongt  the  various  branches  of 
the  Polynesian  race,  which,  though  radically  the  same,  still 
greatly  differ  in  sound.  Whilst  it  is  probable  that  the  Maori 
is  the  latest  off-set  from  the  parent  stock,  it  is  singular 
it  should  have  improved  upon  the  original  by  adding  to  it 
and  enriching  it  with  more  consonants.  Similar  changes 
have,  however,  taken  place  amongst  other  sections  of  the 
same  stock. 

Another  cause  of  difference  arises  from  the  constant 
changes  which  are  going  on  in  the  islands,  from  canoes 
drifting  from  one  to  another,  and  frequently  from  a great 
distance,  as  well  as  from  the  general  erratic  disposition  of 
the  islanders,  thus  it  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  find 
islands  which  have  not  more  than  half-a-dozen  villages  on 
them,  with  as  many  distinct  tongues.  There  appears  to  be 
some  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Sandwich  Island  dialect  is 
not  the  original  one  from  whence  the  Polynesian  was  derived 
and  that  its  origin  must  have  been  still  further  removed,  as 
the  Hawaii  natives  have  the  l and  /,  which  the  Maori  have 
not,  thus  they  say  alofa  instead  of  aroha,  and  fale  instead  of 
ware. 

In  Samoa,  as  in  the  Malay,  the  l has  supplied  the  place  of 
the  r,  as  malama,  instead  of  marama , so  likewise  the  s has 
been  introduced  there  instead  of  the  ng,  as  safulu  for  ngauru  ; 
and  also  / instead  of  h,  as  afula  for  ahum.  The  Marquesan 


LANGUAGE. 


375 


natives  use  the  h and  reject  the  r.  The  Hervey  Island 
dialect  is  widely  used,  and  most  closely  resembles  that  of 
the  Maori.  The  Melanesian  races  differ  from  the  Polynesian 
by  terminating  their  words  with  consonants  ; their  languages 
may  be  said  to  be  quite  distinct  from  those  of  the  latter,* 
which  are  more  or  less  closely  allied. 

In  Samoa  na  is  a particle,  marking  the  imp  tense,  it  is 
also  a pronoun,  standing  for  he,  she,  this,  that,  or  those, 
and  a verb  signifying  to  hush  or  quiet  a child,  to  conceal  or 
deny,  and  a a may  mean  the  fibres  of  a root,  as  aha  in 
Maori,  with  the  addition  of  the  breath  or  slight  aspirate,  a a 
means  the  husk  of  a cocoa  nut,  and  a species  of  fish,  so  in 
Maori,  awa  is  a fresh  water  fish,  and  also  an  exclamation  of 
disappointment. 

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Maori  is  the  re-duplication 
of  words,  this  seems  to  be  done  to  express  number ; the 
doubling  of  a word  makes  it  a noun  of  multitude,  it  con- 
tinues action  and  increases  force. 

Patu  is  to  strike  ; papatu  is  to  strike  frequently. 

Kino  bad,  kikino  very  bad. 

Haere  to  go,  haerere  walk  about. 

Pai  good,  papai  very  good. 

Huti  to  pluck  up,  huhuti  perfectly  to  do  so. 

Tika  straight,  titika  perfectly  so. 

Waka  a canoe,  hollow,  wakawaka  fluted. 

The  influx  of  a foreign  element  may  cause  many  of  these 
alterations.  When  the  English  began  to  colonize  New 
Zealand  they  gave  a proof  how  difficult  it  is  to  lay  aside  the 
characteristic  idiom  of  their  native  tongue,  and  thus  began 
with  introducing  their  own  pronunciation  of  Maori ; for  the 
sweet  sounding  word  Wairarapa,  the  name  of  a district,  sub- 
stituting that  of  Widderup,  and  for  Waingongoro  that  of 
Wan-gong-gorah,  the  chief  Pauparaha  was  changed  into 
Raw-bullah,  the  Maori  tongue  has  the  Tig,  and  h,  which 
are  wanting  in  Tahaiti,  thus  the  word  tangata,  man,  is 
there  ta  a ta,  and  in  the  Sandwich  Islands  Hawaiki  is  Ha- 


* Cruise  of  the  Fazmi. 


376 


LANGUAGE. 


waii,  there  also  the  k is  substituted  for  t,  kanaka,  man;  for 
taugata.  The  Sandwich  dialect  differs  from  the  Tahitian  in 
the  frequent  introduction  of  the  k and  l,  and  the  rejection 
of  f}  as  in  the  Samoan  group,  although  it  is  occasionally 
used  as  fale  for  ware  in  New  Zealand.  The  Marquesan 
admits  the  k and  rejects  the  r.  The  Rarotonga  dialect 
closely  resembles  the  Maori,  by  rejecting  the  / and  using 
the  k and  nga , but  differs  in  not  using  the  h,  thus  in  Tahiti, 
va*  a canoe,  in  Rarotonga  becomes  waka,  the  same  as  in  New 
Zealand,  and  aro  in  Tahiti  is  in  Maori  ngaro.  The  Samoa 
has  /,  i,  and  Z,  which  renders  the  dialect  peculiarly  soft 
and  agreeable,  this  is  the  only  instance  in  which  the  sibilant 
is  used.  The  Tongatapu  uses  the  l for  the  r,  and  differs  from 
all  others  by  using  the  j,  thus  resembling  the  Fiji,  which  is 
assimilated  to  the  languages  spoken  by  Melanesians,  who 
more  frequently  use  consonants,  and  occasionally  terminate 
their  words  with  them,  which  is  never  done  by  the  true 
Polynesians ; their  pronouns  also  are  very  complete,  and 
far  excel  those  of  many  other  parts;  an  instance  may  be 
given — “ let  us  go/’  this  may  or  may  not  include  the  person 
addressed,  but  in  the  Polynesian  it  is  clearly  understood, 
as  it  contains  a double  dual  and  plural,  by  which  in  the 
former  the  person  addressed  is  either  included  or  excluded. 
The  Singalese  alphabet  has  the  nga , as  well  as  the  Maori,* 
this  letter  is  totally  wanting  in  Hawaiki,  which  is  regarded 
as  the  cradle  of  their  race,  as  well  as  religion,  and  many  of 
their  traditions,  manners  and  customs. 

Their  most  ancient  gods  are  evidently  the  same  ; the  Maori 
god  Orongo  is  there  Orono ; and  Tangaroa  the  Polynesian 
Neptune,  is  there  Taaroa,  and  in  Tahaiti  and  Tonga  Tan- 
galoa ; but  the  name  of  the  god  Maui  remains  unchanged  in 
all  those  islands. 

In  Tonga,  where  the/ is  found,  the  waka  of  New  Zealand 
becomes  faka,  and  wahine  fahine , even  in  New  Zealand  a 
similar  dialectic  change  is  to  be  observed  in  different  parts, 
in  the  north  the  letter  d is  used  for  r as  dua  instead  of 


* Sir  T.  E.  Tennant's  Ceylon. — Vol.  i.  p.  328. 


LANGUAGE. 


377 


rua , two,  or  an  under-ground  food  store,  dua  or  siloe  in 
Morocco,  didi  for  riri,  anger,  Tonga  dido,  for  Tonga  riro, 
a volcanic  mountain.  The  s is  there  used  in  the  word  Shongi , 
or  Hongi  in  Shohianga,  for  Hokianga.  The  f is  pronounced, 
in  some  parts  of  New  Zealand  instead  of  w,  as  fenua  for 
wenua,  in  Waikato,  it  is  sounded  in  Bangi  afia  instead  of  Rangi 
a whia ; in  the  Middle  Island  the  ng  is  also  dropped  in  tan- 
gata,  which  is  pronounced  taata,  as  in  some  of  the  isles  ; this 
seems  to  indicate  a more  recent  arrival  of  a portion  of  the 
natives  from  their  parent  isle,  and  this  idea  is  supported  by 
the  darker  color  of  those  Maori ; the  w is  there  also  dropped 
and  the  k substituted  for  the  ng,  as  Akaroa  for  Wangaroa. 

Like  the  Japanese  and  Tartar  tongues,  Maori  substantives 
have  no  gender,  they  form  all  their  cases  and  other  modifica- 
tions by  particles  prefixed,  as  he  tangata,  no  te  tangata,  i to 
tangata,  a man,  of  and  by  the  man ; nga  tangata  the  men, 
so  with  te  wahine,  the  woman,  or  te  mea  the  thing. 

An  ancient  tradition  of  the  natives  of  Aitutaki , an  island 
to  the  north  of  Rarotanga  appears  to  bear  an  independent 
testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  Maori  tradition  of  their  origin. 
The  Aitutakians  state  that  their  ancestors  originally  came 
from  a country  called  Anaiki,  precisely  the  form  which  the 
name  of  Savaii,  the  largest  of  the  Samoan  group,  would 
assume  in  the  Hervey  Island's  dialect,  comparing  this  with 
the  New  Zealand  traditions  of  Hawaiki,  still  called  Hawaii, 
the  close  resemblance  of  the  two  accounts  is  seen,  and  in 
them  is  a strong  proof  of  the  common  identity  of  the  Poly- 
nesian ; none  of  that  race  had  a written  language,  although 
a few  hieroglyphics,  and  apparently  a few  characters  of  a 
language  have  been  discovered  on  Pitcairn's  Island,  together 
with  stone  implements. 

Even  the  Peruvians,  with  all  their  civilization,  had  only 
the  Quipus,  which  was  little  more  than  the  Wampum  of 
North  America ; the  one  being  a cord  about  two  feet  long, 
composed  of  different  colored  beads,  the  other  of  several 
colored  strings,  which  by  certain  positions  and  knots  were 
made  to  represent  various  numbers,  either  of  men,  cattle,  or 
other  things,  but  it  was  necessary  to  know  which,  or  they 


378 


LANGUAGE, 


were  unintelligible  ; it  was  impossible  by  the  quipus  to  ex- 
press a single  idea  or  thing  by  name,  both  may  be  regarded 
as  being  much  the  same  as  our  tallies,  which  until  very 
lately  were  used  even  in  Britain,  and  perhaps  the  ancient 
Ogham  stones  were  little  more  ; all  these  may  be  considered 
as  the  first  rude  efforts  of  the  human  mind  to  perpetuate 
thought  by  visible  symbols ; they  are  a starting  point  of 
civilization,  until  language  is  expressed  by  fixed  signs  or 
letters  there  can  be  no  true  advancement,  because  there  is 
no  possibility  of  handing  down  the  knowledge,  experience, 
and  ideas  of  one  generation  to  another ; tradition  can  only 
preserve  a modicum  of  what  passes  ; it  is  at  most  a bare  re- 
cord of  the  more  striking  events  which  the  memory  can 
retain,  a written  language  perpetuates  thought,  makes  the 
human  mind  to  live  for  ever,  and  to  increase  with  the  race, 
in  a measure,  it  annihilates  even  death  itself. 

The  rude  picture  writing  of  the  Aztec  may  be  considered 
as  the  next  step  from  the  wampum  and  quipus  to  a written 
language  ; by  the  two  former,  numbers  were  preserved,  by 
the  latter,  objects  ; next  came  the  hieroglyphics  of  Yucatan, 
and  probably  letters ; they  represented  a number  of  objects, 
and  by  their  combination  enabled  those  who  used  them 
partially  to  record  ideas,  those  hieroglyphics  becoming  fixed 
symbols  were  the  first  approach  to  an  alphabet  ; they 
have  in  many  cases  been  converted,  in  process  of  time, 
into  letters ; it  has  been  so  with  the  Chinese ; but  though 
this  has  so  far  modified  the  hieroglyphic  form,  still  each 
only  stands  for  as  much  as  the  former,  and  is  not  capable 
of  that  combination  which  letters  are,  for  the  Chinese 
being  a monosyllabic  language,  each  word  by  means  of 
prefixes  and  affixes  may  thus  be  rendered  capable  of  ex- 
pressing many  things  directly  or  indirectly  bearing  reference 
to  the  parent  syllable ; still  all  these  changes  are  expressed 
by  one  figure  variously  altered,  which  at  last  renders  it 
a complicated  character,  and  as  each  simple  idea  was 
expressed  by  one  symbol,  it  naturally  followed  that  those 
would  become  more  and  more  numerous  as  civilization  ad- 
vanced ; so  that  though  at  first  there  were  but  two  hundred 


THE  GRAVE  OF  AN  AUSTRALIAN  NATIVE,  WITH  HIS  NAME,  RANK,  TRIBE,  ETC.,  CUT  IN  HIEROGLYPHICS  ON  THE  TREES. 


LANGUAGE. 


379 


and  fourteen  of  those  symbols,  now  they  have  increased  to 
the  extraordinary  number  of  twenty  thousand  ! hence  the 
difficulty  of  acquiring  a perfect  knowledge  of  the  Chinese 
language  and  literature. 

This  probably  would  have  been  the  case  with  the  Poly- 
nesian had  they  used  hieroglyphics,  as  they  seem  to  originate 
with  monosyllabic  tongues.  The  Maori  has  only  fourteen 
letters,  and  yet  it  is  as  expressive  as  simple,  it  was  the 
missionary  who  fixed  its  sounds,  and  introduced  our  charac- 
ters ; they  had  neither  the  quipus  nor  wampum,  but  only  a 
board  shaped  like  a saw,  which  was  called  he  rakau  walcapa- 
paranga , or  genealogical  board  ; it  was  in  fact  a tally,  having 
a notch  for  each  name,  and  a blank  space  to  denote  where 
the  male  line  failed  and  was  succeeded  by  that  of  the  female ; 
youths  were  taught  their  genealogies  by/epeating  the  names 
of  each  to  which  the  notches  referred.* 

The  Maori  used  a kind  of  hieroglyphical  or  symbolical 
way  of  communication ; a chief  inviting  another  to  join 
in  a war  party  sent  a tattooed  potatoe  and  a fig  of  tobacco 
bound  up  together,  which  was  interpreted  to  mean  that 
the  enemy  was  a Maori  and  not  European  by  the  tattoo, 
and  by  the  tobacco  that  it  represented  smoke,  he  therefore 
roasted  the  one  and  eat  it,  and  smoked  the  other,  to  show 

* The  letters  of  the  more  ancient  alphabets  have  names  which  are  appropriate 
to  their  form,  or  have  reference  even  to  religion  ; thus  those  of  the  Irish 
characters  have  each  the  name  of  a tree,  and  probably  preserve  a remem- 
brance of  grove  worship  ; perhaps  the  most  ancient  as  well  as  simplest  form  of 
letters  is  the  cuneiform,  made  by  the  varied  disposition  of  straight  lines  ; from 
them  we  seem  to  have  derived  our  old  numerals,  and  from  the  same  part  the 
supposed  cradle  of  our  race,  those  still  in  use.  The  ancient  British  or  Welsh 
alphabet  may,  from  its  close  resemblance  to  the  cuneiform,  be  the  most  ancient 
now  in  use  ; with  four  or  five  exceptions,  the  characters  which  compose  it  are 
the  Etruscan  or  Pelasgic  ones.  The  old  Britons  used  to  cut  their  letters  upon 
sticks  or  staves,  which  were  either  squared  or  formed  into  three  sides,  several 
of  these  were  joined  in  a frame  called  Peithynen  (elucidator)  and  sometimes 
Coel  bren  (a  token  stick),  by  which  latter  term  the  alphabet  was  generally 
designated  ; sometimes  they  graved  their  letters  on  a slate  with  an  iron  style, 
or  flint  stone,  and  this  slate  was  a coelvain  (token  stone)  ; they  also  colored 
them  on  wood;*  writing  on  sticks,  alluded  to  in  Ezek.  xxxvii.  16,  20  ; Numb, 
xvii.  2. 

* Williams’  Ecclesiastical  Antiquities  of  the  Cymry , or  Ancient  British  Church. 


380 


LANGUAGE. 


he  accepted  the  invitation,  and  would  join  him  with  his  gnns 
and  powder.  Another  sent  a waterproof  coat  with  the  sleeves 
made  of  patchwork,  red,  blue,  yellow,  and  green,  intimating 
that  they  must  wait  until  all  the  tribes  were  united  before 
their  force  would  be  waterproof,  i.e.,  able  to  encounter  the 
European.  Another  chief  sent  a large  pipe,  which  would 
hold  a pound  of  tobacco,  which  was  lighted  in  a large 
assembly,  the  emissary  taking  the  first  whiff,  and  then  pass- 
ing it  round,  whoever  smoked  it  showed  that  he  joined  in 
the  war. 

“ The  ancient  Peruvians  had  no  manuscript  letters  for 
single  sounds,  but  they  had  a method  by  which  they  com- 
posed words  and  incorporated  ideas  ; this  consisted  in 
the  dexterous  intertwining  of  knots  on  strings,  so  as  to 
render  them  auxiliaries  to  the  memory ; this  was  called  the 
Quipu ; it  was  composed  of  one  thick  head,  or  top  string, 
to  which,  at  certain  distances,  thinner  ones  were  fastened ; 
the  top  string  was  much  thicker  than  the  pendant  ones,  and 
consisted  of  two  doubly  twisted  threads,  over  which  twe 
single  threads  were  wound ; the  branches,  if  I may  apply 
the  term  to  these  strings,  were  fastened  to  the  top  by  a 
simple  loop,  the  knots  made  were  either  single  or  manifold ; 
the  lengths  of  the  strings  used  in  making  the  quipu  were 
various  ; the  transverse  or  top  one  often  measured  several 
yards,  and  sometimes  only  a foot  long;  the  branches  were 
seldom  more  than  two  feet,  and  in  general  much  shorter; 
the  strings  were  often  of  different  colors,  each  having  its 
own  particular  meaning ; that  for  soldiers  was  red ; for 
gold,  yellow  ; for  silver,  white  ; for  corn,  green,  &c. ; this 
writing  by  knots  was  especially  employed  for  numerical 
and  statistical  tables,  each  single  knot  representing  ten  ; 
each  double  one  stood  for  a hundred ; each  triple  one  for 
a thousand,  &c. ; two  single  knots  standing  together  made 
twenty  ; and  two  double  ones  two  hundred ; this  method 
of  calculation  is  still  practised  by  the  shepherds  of  the  Puna. 
They  explained  it  as  follows  : on  the  first  branch  or  string  they 
usually  placed  the  number  of  the  bulls ; on  the  second  that 
of  the  cows,  these  being  classed  into  those  in  milk,  and  those 


LANGUAGE. 


381 


which  were  not ; on  the  next  strings  were  the  calves,  accord- 
ing to  their  ages  and  sizes ; then  came  the  sheep,  &c. 

“ In  this  manner  the  ancient  Peruvians  kept  the  accounts 
of  their  army ; on  one  string  were  numbered  the  soldiers 
with  slings ; on  another  the  spear-men ; on  a third  those 
who  carried  clubs,  &c. ; in  every  town  some  expert  men 
were  appointed  to  tie  the  knots  of  the  quipu,  and  to  explain 
them ; these  men  were  called  quipucamayocuna  (literally 
officers  of  the  knots)  ; imperfect  as  was  this  method,  yet  in 
the  flourishing  period  of  the  Inca  government,  the  appointed 
officers  had  acquired  great  dexterity  in  unriddling  the  mean- 
ing of  the  knots.  It,  however,  seldom  happened  that  they 
had  to  read  a quipu  without  some  verbal  commentary, 
something  was  always  required  to  be  added  if  the  quipu 
came  from  a distant  province,  to  explain  whether  it  related 
to  the  numbering  of  the  population,  tributes,  or  war,  &c. ; 
through  long-continued  practice,  the  officers  who  had  charge 
of  the  quipu s became  so  perfect  in  their  duties,  that  they 
could  with  facility  communicate  the  laws  and  ordinances, 
and  all  the  most  important  events  of  the  kingdom  by  this 
medium. 

“ All  attempts  now  made  to  decipher  Peruvian  quipus 
have  been  unsatisfactory^  the  principal  obstacle  to  decipher- 
ing those  found  on  graves,  being  the  want  of  oral  communi- 
cation to  point  out  the  subjects  to  which  they  refer. 

(C  Some  Indians  in  the  southern  provinces  of  Peru  are 
understood  to  possess  a perfect  knowledge  of  the  ancient 
quipus,  from  information  transmitted  to  them  from  their 
ancestors  ; but  they  keep  that  knowledge  profoundly  secret 
from  the  whites.  The  ancient  Peruvians  also  used  a certain 
kind  of  hieroglyphics,  which  they  engraved  in  stone,  and 
preserved  in  their  temples.”*  There  appears  to  be  a great 
similarity  between  these  Peruvian  hieroglyphics  and  those 
found  in  Mexico  and  Brazil. 

When  therefore  it  is  remembered  that  Polynesia  was 
destitute  of  letters,  it  seems  remarkable  that  its  inhabitants 
should  have  languages  so  well  constructed  and  obedient  to 

* Dr*  Von  Isohudi s Travels  in  Peru,  page  491. 


382 


LANGUAGE. 


rules  ; in  fact,  this  remark  seems  to  apply  with  the  greatest 
force  to  the  most  debased  races.  The  Australian  savage 
who  roams  the  forest,  and  solely  seeks  his  support  from 
the  chase  and  indigenous  produce  of  his  country,  seems  to 
possess  a tongue  much  superior  in  many  respects  to  that 
of  others  far  more  advanced  in  civilization ; he  has  a kind 
of  simple  classification  for  the  grand  botanical  and  zoolo- 
gical divisions,  which  is  very  surprising  ; the  Australian 
has  words  to  distinguish  tuberous  from  climbing  and  other 
plants,  the  marsuopial,  flying,  predatory  animals,  and  birds, 
he  displays  a knowledge  of  natural  history,  which  shows 
what  a close  observer  he  has  been  of  nature.  Thus,  as  a 
writer  remarks : “ It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  usages  of 
barbarous  as  well  as  civilized  nations  conform  perfectly  to 
grammatical  rules,  that  the  uneducated  in  all  countries 
have  certain  laws  of  speech  as  much  as  Shakespear  or 
Bacon.”* 

An  admirable  paper  on  this  subject  states  : “ The  Polyne- 
sian language  is  said  by  all  who  have  studied  it,  to  possess 
some  particular  points  of  beauty  ; the  words  of  this  language 
are  very  simple ; the  syllables  are  found  by  adding  to  a 
single  vowel  or  consonant : all  the  words  are  fixed  and 
unchangeable,  and  the  same  word  becomes  either  a noun, 
an  adjective,  verb,  or  particle;  the  different  relations  of  the 
parts  of  a subject  which  we  express  by  declensions,  conjuga- 
tions, and  prepositions,  are  made  by  words  which  in  this  case 
may  be  called  particles,  although  they  are  in  reality  perfect 
words,  which  in  all  other  cases  are  substantives,  adjectives, 
and  verbs.  It  is  by  the  aid  of  these  particle-formed  words, 
that  they  are  able  to  express  the  different  relations  of  the 
parts  of  a sentence  with  a precision  and  force,  of  which  the 
more  cultivated  languages  are  not  capable,  because  their 
terminations  and  particles  are  in  general  nothing  more  than 
signs,  possessing  no  other  value  than  that  of  which  they  are 
the  indicators ; it  is  truly  a living  language ; our  cultivated 
tongues  when  placed  along  side  of  it,  are  but  old  trees  with 


Essays  and  Interpretation  of  Scripture,  page  393. 


LANGUAGE. 


388 


dry  branches,  whose  terminations  and  particles  are  dead, 
since  we  no  longer  are  acquainted  with  their  meaning.”* 

And  carrying  on  the  same  simile  of  the  tree,  European 
languages  are  like  so  many  grafts  upon  one  stem,  that  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  recognize  the  parent  stock,  so  much 
are  they  intermingled  with  other  tongues ; whilst  these 
languages  are  the  simple  ungrafted  trees  which  stand  forth 
in  all  their  primitive  distinctiveness,  rendering  them  con- 
spicuous amongst  all  the  surrounding  ones. 

* An  Extract  from  Paper  of  M.  a de  Quatrefages,  in  the  February  Number 
of  the  ‘ ‘ Revue  de  deux  mo  tides,  ” Paris,  1864. 


HE  PAPA,  OR  CARVED  BOX. 


ANCIENT  SEA  CLIFF  INLAND  ON  THE  MOKAU. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


The  word  Maori , which  they  apply  to  themselves  as  their 
peculiar  name,  signifies  anything  that  is  native  or  indige- 
nous. Maori  has  precisely  the  same  meaning  as  the  word 
Moor,  and  has  a singular  resemblance  to  it,  especially  to  the 
more  ancient  one  of  Mauri ; the  root  of  the  word  is  uri, 
which  means  dark,,  hence  Mauri  is  the  dark  blood  of  the 
heart,  and  uri  the  root  of  many  other  words,  as  pouri, 
darkness ; kakouri,  dark,  over-hanging  cloud ; wheuri,  dark 
deep  water;  tua  uri  uri,. blackening  masses,  dark  clouds; 
kakarauri,  getting  dark,  dusk  ; kauri,  the  kauri  pine,  most 
probably  derived  from  the  rezin  which,  when  burnt  for  tat- 
tooing, is  black ; uri  also  signifies  offspring,  the  uri  Tangata, 
the  beginning  of  man,  is  lost  in  darkness. 

There  are  two  other  African  words  identical  with  New 
Zealand  ones,  which  may  be  alluded  to  without  drawing 
any  inference  from  them ; one  is  door,  the  Siloe  of  Morocco, 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


385 


a cave  made  in  the  earth  to  keep  wheat  in,  entered  by  a 
small  door  or  opening  on  the  top,  which  is  closed  by  a large 
stone  or  block  of  wood,  this  is  precisely  the  description  of  the 
New  Zealand  dud  or  rua,  made  to  hold  the  kumara. 

The  New  Zealand  word  for  the  sun  is  raj  the  Coptic  one 
is  the  same ; the  Egyptian  rah ; hence,  perhaps,  the  origin 
of  the  East  Indian  word  Rajah  Maha,  the  great  rajah  or 
prince,  Maha , is  a New  Zealand  word  for  multitude ; the 
sun  being  the  light  of  heaven,  the  prince  that  of  the  multi- 
tude ; so  the  New  Zealand  word  rangitara , or  chief,  when 
dissected,  is  ra-nga-tira,  which  simply  means  the  light  of  com- 
panies, or  assemblies  of  men,  and  raj,  rule,  from  which  comes 
rex , king.  Another  New  Zealand  word  of  great  interest, 
being  a root  of  many,  and  bearing  an  analogy  to  words  of 
almost  every  language,  is  ha,  to  burn  ; we  have  it  in  our  word 
candle , in  the  Latin  also,  from  whence  we  obtained  it,  and 
perhaps,  in  the  old  word  hindle  ; it  is  seen  in  /< atw,  to  burn ; 
in  Tartary,  and  throughout  the  East,  even  to  China,  in 
hang,  an  oven  or  stove  ; and  in  the  hhan,  an  edifice  erected 
for  the  warmth  and  shelter  of  the  wayworn  traveller ; in 
Maori,  hajoura,  fire,  implies  a substitute  for  the  light  of 
day ; in  hahano,  seed,  which  contains  the  germ  of  life ; and 
in  hai,  food,  the  fuel  that  sustains  the  flame  of  life.  This 
word  is  also  connected  with  another,  and  one  which 
stands  out  as  a landmark  to  guide  us  in  the  search  after 
the  origin  of  the  New  Zealand  race,  and  that  is  hava.  In 
old  Arabic,  the  word  for  wine  is  hahweh*  a most  ap- 
propriate term  for  any  intoxicating  beverage,  being  the 
substance  that  burns  and  carries  off  the  senses.  Ka  to  burn, 
and  va  or  weh,  Latin  veho,  Sanscrit  wahana,  English  wain, 
waggon,  and  the  simple  Maori  root  wa,  to  carry  ;f  from 
hahweh,  wine,  comes  hahveh,  Turkish,  Italian  caffe  and  En- 
glish coffee.  Mahomet  forbad  his  followers  the  use  of  wine, 

* See  Lane's  Egypt. 

f Having  no  vehicle,  it  is  applied  to  burthens  carried  on  the  shoulder.  In 
Tahaiti,  royalty  itself  was  thus  borne  ; regular  relays  of  men  being  appointed, 
as  soon  as  one  pair  of  shoulders  grew  tired,  the  royal  burthen  vaulted  from  them 
to  another. 


386 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


they  found  a substitute  in  coffee ; and,  therefore,  naturally 
transferred  the  word  for  it  to  the  other;  the  false  prophet 
propagated  his  faith,  not  by  the  sword  of  the  Word,  but  of 
steel,  and  wherever  he  went,  he  carried  his  laws  and  institu- 
tions with  him  ; to  the  west  his  faith  prevailed  even  to  the 
pillars  of  Hercules ; Europe  itself  was  threatened ; its  fairest 
parts  fell  under  the  sway  of  his  followers  ; the  Byzantine 
throne  itself  was  ascended,  and  Spain  for  many  years  was 
the  abode  of  the  Moor ; to  the  East  it  reached  Central  Asia, 
India,  and  even  the  remote  islands  of  the  Indian  Archipelago 
and  Polynesia,  therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  kahweh 
preserved  in  the  word  kava,  the  intoxicating  beverage  of  the 
South  Sea  Islands,  and  their  substitute  for  wine  and  coffee ; 
in  New  Zealand  the  word  is  found  in  kawa  kawa,  the  'piper 
excelsum,  pepper  tree,  and  perhaps  in  the  casava  of  America. 

The  name  for  a girl  is  Sine , but  when  old  enough  to 
become  a bearer  of  burthens,  she  is  a wa  hine}  so  when  she 
is  a mother  and  has  to  carry  a child,  not  in  her  arms  but 
on  her  shoulders,  the  Maori  way,  she  is  a waea , her  offspring 
are  wanau,  and  her  burthens  wahanga. 

Another  remarkable  word  for  its  travels  is  Paradise. 
Every  nation  has  pictured  to  itself  some  place  of  bliss,  some 
abode  of  rest  for  the  soul.  Men  vary  in  their  idea  of  the 
character  of  that  happy  spot,  but  still  the  idea  exists,  and 
all  of  them  are  included  between  the  extremes  of  the  sensual 
paradise  of  Mahomet,  and  the  spiritual  and  holy  one  of  the 
Christian  ; the  word  paradise  itself  conveys  the  idea  of  a 
garden  enclosed,  a garden  of  delights ; it  is  the  place  of  re- 
pose, protected  from  every  foe,  no  enemy  can  enter,  or  dis- 
turb the  rest  of  the  soul ; the  Hebrew  word  is  pardes  ; the 
Arabic  jirdaus , plural  faradisa  ; Syriac  and  Armenian  partes  ; 
Sanscrit  pradisa , or  paradisa,  a circuit  or  district ; firdusi , 
Persian,  a pleasure  garden ; TrapaSewros,  an  enclosed  garden, 
it  is  seen  in  the  English  words  park , pale,  and  parapet ; and 
is  preserved  in  parae,  Maori  for  a small  plain  enclosed  with 
forest.  The  simple  root  of  all  these  words  appears  to  be  Pa, 
to  obstruct,  hence  Taie-pa  and  Pa-korokoro , are  fences  for 
farms ; Parepare  a fortification  for  towns ; pare,  to  ward  off. 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


387 


is  identical  with  the  English  word  parry.  A temple  in  Ceylon 
is  Dagoba , in  India  Pagoda,  and  amongst  the  South  Sea 
Island  Fytoka  ; in  Burmah  Watetoka,  which  in  New  Zealand 
is  the  door  of  a chief’s  house. 

The  name  for  the  cocoa  palm  in  most  of  the  isles  of  Poly- 
nesia is  ni  ; in  the  Brumer  isles,  niu,  which  signifies  the  tree 
producing  milk,  ni  the  name  for  a palm  tree,  and  u milk,  that 
is,  the  cocoa  nut ; in  those  isles  it  is  spun  round  in  divination, 
in  New  Zealand,  where  there  are  no  cocoa  nuts,  the  practice 
of  divining  by  rods  was  adopted  instead,  for  which  the  term 
niu  was  used,  a clear  proof  of  its  having  been  brought  from 
the  tropical  homes  of  their  forefathers.  The  name  uwhi  or 
ufi , the  yam  of  the  South  Sea  Islands,  is  given  to  a small 
one  that  is  indigenous  to  New  Zealand,  and  to  the  root  of  a 
fern  (marattia  elegansj,  which  is  also  edible,  and  slightly 
resembling  the  yam ; uri,  the  fruit  of  the  kiekie,  the  largest 
New  Zealand  fruit,  is  also  the  name  of  the  bread  fruit ; 
ti  ( dracena  AustralisJ  is  a name  common  to  all  the  isles ; 
it  produces  a long  fleshy  tap-root  like  a carrot,  which 
was  formerly  much  used  as  food.  Nearly  all  the  names 
of  edible  substances  are  identical  with  those  of  the  islands ; 
the  taro , kumara,  hue,  many  of  the  Maori  trees  which  re- 
semble those  of  the  isles  they  left,  bear  the  same  names, 
such  as  the  alia,  hutu,  mai,  miro,  rata,  and  wau.  Poi 
is  the  New  Zealand  word  for  a ball,  this  in  Tahaiti  is  also 
the  name  of  the  bread  fruit  when  made  up  into  balls.  This 
valuable  tree  is  not  known  in  the  colder  climate  of  New 
Zealand,  but  the  word  remains. 

The  pigeon  has  two  names,  the  kuku  and  kukupa,  which 
are  common  to  the  isles;  so  also  the  ruru,  owl;  the  More , 
rat,  and  kuri,  dog,  the  only  animals  there  known  have  simi- 
tar names ; the  kuku,  mussel,  a shell-fish  universally  eaten, 
has  generally  the  same  name;  but  it  is  not  necessary  to 
carry  this  list  further;  it  applies  to  plants,  stones,  insects, 
implements,  manners,  customs,  mythology,  gods,  in  fact,  to 
everything,  for  the  language  itself  is  radically  the  same,  and 
clearly  shows  that  the  Polynesians  form  one  grand  family, 
whilst  it  is  evident,  the  greater  or  less  variation  existing 

c c 2 


388 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


only  proves  the  more  recent  or  remote  connection  of  one  with 
another  and  does  not  diminish  the  probability  of  their  common 
origin.  Another  word  which  we  seem  to  recognize  in  the  Turk- 
ish hookah,  probably  the  same  in  substance  as  the  meerschaum 
and  ecume  de  mer,  is  huka,  the  Maori  for  the  froth  of  the 
sea ; when  the  New  Zealanders  arrived,  they  saw  snow  for 
the  first  time,  which  to  them  would  appear  more  like  the 
froth  of  the  sea  than  anything  else,  so  they  naturally  applied 
that  word  to  it. 

There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  at  least  one  Chinese  junk,  if 
not  more,  has  reached  New  Zealand,  and  imparted  a character 
to  the  race,  as  well  as  an  influence  on  their  customs ; that  the 
natives  where  it  came  would  endeavour  to  obtain  the  alliance 
of  a more  civilized  people  than  themselves,  and  secure  them 
to  strengthen  their  tribes  by  giving  them  their  daughters 
in  marriage  seems  highly  probable ; these  strangers,  too, 
may  have  introduced  the  art  of  weaving,  which  seems  to 
be  carried  to  greater  perfection  amongst  the  Maori  than 
could  otherwise  be  expected  from  them.  I am  not  aware 
that  either  in  Tahaiti  or  Hawaii  they  had  attained  a 
similar  degree  of  excellence ; the  general  clothing  in  the 
islands  being  the  tapatajpa,  cloth  made  from  the  bark  of 
trees,  chiefly  the  wau,  or  paper  mulberry ; and  though  the 
making  of  that  cloth  has  long  ceased,  yet,  traditionally, 
it  was  once  fabricated  in  New  Zealand.  The  name  is  still 
preserved  in  the  ante,  from  which  ribbons  were  formed,  even 
up  to  a late  period,  but  the  cloth  itself  appears  to  have  been 
superseded  by  the  more  durable  and  elegant  product  of  the 
loom  ; the  finely- embroidered  borders  of  their  garments  be- 
token a far  more  advanced  state  than  they  can  lay  claim  to 
in  the  other  arts  they  are  acquainted  with ; their  houses 
likewise  seem  to  indicate  a Chinese  or  Japanese  origin, 
built  in  a similar  way  to  those  which  are  made  of  bamboo, 
ornamented  with  arapaki,  or  lattice  work  of  various  colors 
and  patterns,  they  evince  much  skill,  and  even  elegance  and 
taste. 

There  is  scarcely  any  work  relating  to  the  Polynesian  Isles 
to  be  compared  with  that  of  t(  Mariner’s  Tonga  Isles,”  either 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


389 


for  the  faithfulness  of  the  description  given  of  their  manners 
and  customs,  or  for  the  general  interest  of  his  narrative,  from 
it  may  be  gathered  many  particulars  of  resemblance  between 
the  inhabitants  of  New  Zealand  and  Tonga ; whilst  the  former 
believed  that  Maui  fished  up  their  island,  which  thence  bears 
the  name  of  his  fish,  the  latter  also  state  that  theirs  were 
drawn  out  of  the  water  by  Tangaloa,  whilst  fishing  with  the 
line  and  hook.*  Tangaloa,  as  has  already  been  said,  is  identical 
with  Tangaroa,  one  of  the  most  ancient  of  the  Maori  deities, 
he  is  also  viewed  in  Tonga  as  the  god  of  the  ocean  ; their 
ideas  likewise  agree  in  the  pre-existence  of  the  ocean,  and 
of  the  sky  being  solid,  and  originally  resting  on  the  earth. 

The  Hotua  Pou , who  are  spoken  of  as  mischievous  gods, 
whose  attribute  is  never  to  dispense  good,  but  petty  evils, 
not  as  a punishment,  but  indiscriminately  from  a mischievous 
disposition,  exactly  agree  with  the  Atua  Potihi  of  the  Maori. 

The  New  Zealander  also  has  some  idea  of  high  chiefs,  or 
arikis,  going  to  heaven  after  death,  whilst  those  of  inferior 
note  went  to  Po,  or  Hades;  also  that  their  gods  manifest 
themselves  to  their  descendants  or  priests,  under  the  form  of 
lizards,  spiders,  moths,  and  in  whirlwinds,  flashes  of  lightning, 
&c.  Their  ideas  of  omens  are  also  similar,  as  well  as  the 
word  for  divination,  f ta  niu , although  the  way  of  divining  is 
different,  the  Tonga  native  drawing  a favorable  or  unfavor- 
able conclusion  from  the  spinning  of  the  cocoa  nut. 

The  tuitonga  and  veachi , sacred  chiefs,  have  no  representa- 
tive in  New  Zealand,  except  that  every  high  chief  or  ariki 
is  a sacred  character,  and  supposed  to  have  the  power  of 
conversing  at  pleasure  with  his  ancestral  gods,  and,  in  fact, 
to  be  one  himself  on  earth ; the  former  seem  to  have  been 
rather  spiritual  kings,  more  nearly  resembling  the  Dairi  of 
Japan,  the  Lama,  Sovereign  Pontiff  of  Thibet,  or  the  Pope 
of  Pome.J  ’The  carnal  intercourse  of  atuas  and  females  is 
the  common  belief  of  both  races,  the  way  that  gods  speak 
to  men,  by  whistling  from  the  roof  of  houses,  is  also  the  same, 

* Mariner’s  Tonga  Isles , vol.  ii.  page  99.- 
f Ibid , vol.  ii.  page  191. 
t Ibid , vol.  ii.  pages  no — 124. 


390 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


the  custom  of  widows  committing  suicide,  and  of  burying  in 
a sitting  posture,  is  identical.  The  malai  corresponds  with  the 
marae,  being  the  principal  court  in  a pa,  or  the  open  space 
before  the  priest's  house,  where  strangers  are  received,  and 
all  their  grand  councils  held ; the  word  for  a king  in  Tonga  is 
how , there  is  no  similar  dignity  in  New  Zealand,  therefore  it 
is  naturally  not  to  be  found,  yet  there  are  others  derived 
from  this  root ; of  such  is  the  kai  wakahowhow , written 
hauhau , the  person  who  gives  command  in  a war  canoe  to 
the  paddlers,  and  regulates  the  time.  Kauhau , to  teach,  to 
instruct,  or  direct ; in  Tonga,  an  adept  in  anything  has  the 
prefix  of  kau  : a kau  tangata  is  a skilful  man ; a kau  moana , 
a skilful  sailor ; in  New  Zealand  he  is  called  he  au  moana ; 
the  word  is  found  in  kau  matua}  an  elder.  The  description 
of  the  tapu}  and  of  their  feasts,  will  do  for  either  race.  The 
custom  of  cutting  with  shells  or  obsidian,  and  allowing  the 
blood  to  dry  on  the  person,  is  also  the  same,  although  in  New 
Zealand  it  is  chiefly  practised  by  the  women,  and  confined 
to  the  forehead  or  chest.  Elegiac  ballads  were  also  written 
in  honor  of  great  chiefs,  and  most  frequently  by  their  widows. 
In  all  these  particulars,  and  many  others,  the  identity  of 
the  Tonga  natives  with  those  of  New  Zealand  is  evident;  in 
fact,  the  language  is  so  nearly  alike,  that  the  natives  can 
make  themselves  understood  to  each  other.  Tonga  is  the 
name  given  by  the  Maori  to  the  south  wind,  the  highest 
mountain  is  also  honored  with  the  same,  being  called  tonga 
riro .* 

The  points  of  agreement  between  the  Fiji  and  Maori  are 
not  so  evident;  there  are,  however,  many  particulars  in 
which  they  likewise  agree.  The  following  were  received 
from  a Wesleyan  Missionary  stationed  at  Mere.f  The  spirit 
of  a still-born  child  is  very  much  feared.  Makutus  or  witch- 
craft, is  practised  in  a similar  way  to  that  of  the  Maori,  by 
procuring  some  of  the  parings  of  the  food  which  the  person 
to,  be  destroyed  has  eaten ; these  are  buried,  and  as  they 
decay,  the  victim  also  pines  away  and  dies. 

* Tonga  riro  simply  means  Tonga,  which  has  left  or  departed  from  its  old 
position  in  the  Tonga  Islands,  and  gone  to  the  south. 

f Rev.  Mr.  Hazfewood. 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


391 


Langi , heaven  rangi , (New  Zealand),  literally  the  place 
where  the  heaven  and  the  earth  unite,  or  the  distant  horizon, 
from  whence  the  European  was  thought  to  come,  it  being 
considered  his  remote  home,  and  therefore  he  is  called  papa- 
langi , or  the  person  who  comes  from  the  surface  of  heaven. 
Tito , the  bread  fruit,  is  also  the  heart.  New  Zealand  uri, 
ufi , or  uwi,  the  yam;  ndalo,  talo  (Tonga),  taro  (New  Zea- 
land), the  edible  species  of  the  arum.  The  word  koli  agrees 
with  the  New  Zealand  kuri , dog.  Circumcision  universally 
obtains  in  the  Fiji  Isles  ; there  is  a rite  nearly  approaching 
it  in  New  Zealand,  called  the  putete.  Thake  the  east,  also 
above  like  the  sun,  as  ake  in  Tonga  and  New  Zealand.  Ba , 
down  below  as  the  sun  raro}  New  Zealand,  in  Fiji  it  is  the 
west,  in  New  Zealand  the  north.  Toka  lau , the  north,  is 
tokarau,  which  is  north-east  in  New  Zealand.  Kau,  the  plural 
prefix,  is  used  ordinarily  for  men ; kau  matua}  elders ; and 
how  is  the  plural  for  chiefs  and  gods.  Fango  is  the  plural 
for  animals.  Ngahi}  for  inanimate  objects.  Onga  is  the 
dual  prefix  before  animals.  Tro,  to  peep,  is  the  same  as  tiro 
in  New  Zealand.  Dating  a,  the  ear,  agrees  with  taringa. 

The  following  words  were  taken  from  a list  of  Malayan 
dialects,  spoken  in  Borneo  : — 


English. 

Malay. 

New  Zealand. 

Two. 

Dua. 

Dua,  rua. 

Three. 

Tiga,  taru. 

Torn. 

Five. 

Limah,  rimeh. 

Rima. 

Mother. 

Ma. 

Waea. 

Woman. 

Ini. 

Hine. 

Man.. 

Orang. 

Tangata. 

Head. 

Kapala  {caput). 

Upoko,  Kapiti  cliff. 

Ear. 

Telinga. 

Taringa. 

Eyes. 

Mata. 

Mata. 

Nose. 

Idong. 

Ihn. 

Month. 

Mulat. 

Mangai. 

Teeth. 

Gigi,  nipun. 

Niho. 

Water. 

Ayer,  ai. 

Wai. 

Dead. 

Mati  mate. 

Mate. 

Fire. 

Api. 

Ahi. 

A path. 

Suntah,  arau. 

Ara. 

392 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


English.  Malay . 

Sky.  Langit. 

Stone.  Batu. 

Bird.  Mutah,  mennk. 

The  final  k in  Malay  is  often  mute.- 


New  Zealand. 

Rangi. 

Kohatu,  kowatu. 
Manu. 

-The  consonants  b,  d,  may 


have  the  intervening  vowel, 


a,  e,  i,  o,  or  u,  changed  at  pleasure. 


The  resemblance  between  the  New  Zealanders  and  the 
natives  of  the  Society  and  Sandwich  Isles  is  still  more  ob- 
servable, and,  perhaps,  of  all  islands,  the  little  one  of  Waiho, 
or  Easter  Island,  is  the  most  perfect ; it  appears  highly 
probable  that  some  of  its  inhabitants  found  their  way  to 
New  Zealand,  and  remarkable  that  the  spot  which  they 
would  be  most  likely  to  make  by  the  prevailing  current  in 
reaching  New  Zealand  should  be  called  Waiho,*  the  name 
of  their  isle.  Easter  Island  also  seems  to  have  become  the 
abode  of  the  progenitors  of  the  Polynesian  race  before  it  had 
lost  some  of  its  original  knowledge  of  the  arts.  The  large 
stone  monuments  still  existing  there  speak  of  a bygone 
skill,  and,  perhaps,  of  acquaintance  with  the  use  of  iron ; 
the  form,  too,  of  the  covering  of  the  heads  of  those  figures 
bears  a remarkable  resemblance  to  some  seen  in  Egyptian 
hieroglyphics,  especially  of  that  supposed  to  refer  to  Shi- 
shak's  victory  over  Rehoboam.  It  is  evident  the  New 
Zealanders,  from  their  own  account,  did  not  all  come  either 
at  the  same  time,  from  the  same  place,  or  to  the  same  part 
of  the  island  :f  the  peculiar  difference  of  dialect  still  existing 
amongst  the  tribes  would,  to  the  skilful  Polynesian  philo- 


* Waiho,  also  a name  of  one  of  the  Sandwich  Islands,  signifying  to  leave  or 
abandon. 

f This  is  clearly  seen  in  the  variation  of  names  which  we  find  in  different 
parts  of  the  island,  which  evidently,  proves,  that  each  emigration  gave  them 
according  to  the  impressions  formed  on  first  landing.  Thus,  in  the 

North  Kukupa  is  in  the  South  Keriru , a pigeon. — Kuku,  pigeons  pre- 


Tui 

Tupakihi 

Kapura 

Paua 

Tomae  rangi 


[served  in  their  own  fat. 
Koko  A bird. 

Tutu , Coriaria  sarmentosa. 

A hi,  Fire. 

Hau , Smoke. 

Hau  nui.  Dew  and  showers. 


Nearly  all  the  trees  differ  in  their  names  ; thus  in  the  North  the  phormium 
tenax  is  called  korari ; in  the  South,  that  is  the  name  of  the  flower  stalk 


393 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 

logist,  point  out  almost  the  precise  locality  from  whence 
each  came. 

The  Maori  preserve  the  use  of  the  h and  ng  ; their  ancestors 
have  lost  them;  thus  were  the  Anglo- Australians  to  he  en- 
tirely cut  off  from  the  parent  stock  for  several  centuries,  it  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  changes  quite  equal  to  these  would 
take  place  in  the  language ; but  that  the  offset  should  pre- 
serve the  original  purity  of  their  tongue  is  most  remarkable. 
Hawaii  is  still  the  name  of  the  largest  of  the  Sandwich  Isles, 
it  only  wants  the  h , this  the  New  Zealander  called  *Hawaihi 
tawiti  nui , or  the  very  distant  Hawaiki ; thence  they  came  to 
Hawaihi  pat  a,  or  nearer  Hawaiki,  literally  the  lesser  isle, 
being  smaller  than  Hawaiki,  that  is  Tahaiti ; and  having  re- 
mained there  until  their  numbers  were  too  large  for  the  size 
of  the  island,  they  again  migrated  to  Hawaihi  i te  moutere  ; 
supposing  this  to  have  been  Easter  Island,  which  is  situ- 
ated at  the  end  of  the  south-east  trade  winds,  there  is  a 
very  natural  and  easy  course  to  Coromandel  Harbour,  New 
Zealand,  which,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  bears  the 
same  name  as  that  of  Easter  Isle ; all  their  traditions  state 
they  came  from  the  East : here,  then,  native  memory  has 
preserved  the  recollection  of  three  several  removes,  how 
many  more  may  have  been  forgotten  ? 

At  Parapara , a small  native  viliage  on  the  road  from 
Kaitaia  to  Doubtless  Bay,  there  resided  (1840)  an  intelligent 
old  chief,  named  Hahahai,  a tohunga  deeply  versed  in  the 

only,  the  plant  itself  is  harakeke  ; so  also  the  names  of  address  vary  in  differ- 
ent parts  : the  Nga.  puhi  say  E koro , or  E mar  a ; those  in  the  South  laugh 
at  it,  there  they  say,  E tama , or  E hoa ; and  in  the  more  central  part 
of  the  island,  it  is  E pa  ; in  fact,  a remarkable  instance  of  this  difference  has 
occurred  in  recent  times  : when  that  valuable  tuber,  the  potatoe,  was  intro- 
duced by  Captain  Cook,  and  given  in  the  North,  the  natives  there  called  it 
kapana  ; in  the  Thames,  where  he  also  left  it,  they  named  it  riwai ; and  in 
the  South,  or  Cook’s  Straits,  it  goes  by  the  name  of  Taewa  ; still  later,  the 
hen  was  called  in  one  part  a heihei , in  another  a tikaokao  ; so  the  horse  was  a 
hoiho , and  also  a kuri,  or  big  dog,  that  being  the  only  animal  they  were  then 
acquainted  with. 

* I Kunemai  i Hawaiki,  The  seed  of  our  coming  is  from  Ha- 

waiki. 

Te  kune  kai  te  kune  tangata,  The  seed  of  food,  the  seed  of  man. 


394 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


traditions  of  his  country ; although  unbaptized  himself,  yet 
most  of  the  members  of  his  family  were,  he  therefore  became 
attached  to  the  Missionaries,  and  freely  answered  all  their 
enquiries  about  his  ancestors,  a few  years  ago  he  said  such  a 
thing  would  not  have  been  thought  of ; and  hence  we  see 
how  unlikely  it  is  that  mere  strangers,  passing  through  the 
country,  can  acquire  a knowledge  of  traditions  held  to  be 
sacred,  and  which  even  amongst  themselves  are  only  per- 
fectly known  to  few. 

He  repeated  a list  of  twenty-six  generations  from  their 
first  coming  to  this  island,  namely  : — 


1. 

Tiki. 

14.  Rapa  rapa  te  uira. 

2. 

Maui. 

15.  Nuku  tawiti. 

8. 

Po. 

16.  Hae  (a  woman). 

4. 

Maweti, 

17.  Moe  rewa  (lived  to  be  very 
old.) 

5. 

Atua. 

18.  Papa  waka  miha  miha. 

6. 

Maea. 

19.  Te  turn. 

7. 

Waikapu. 

20.  Heke  rangi. 

8. 

Tukuora. 

21.  Patua. 

9. 

Tutenga  nahau. 

22.  Awatai. 

10. 

Tau  mumu  hue. 

28.  Koro  awio. 

11. 

Taua  na  nga. 

24.  Mapihi. 

12. 

Te  niho  o te  rangi. 

25.  Haruru. 

18- 

Mumu  te  awa. 

26.  Moehau. 

The  last  is  an  old  woman,  a great  priestess,  who  was  then 
living  at  Knuckle  Point ; Hahakai,  in  his  first  half-dozen 
names,  seems  to  have  gotten  amongst  the  gods.  If  thirty 
years  be  allowed  for  a generation,  and  six  are  taken  away,  it 
will  give  a period  of  six  hundred  years. 

He  stated  that  their  ancestors  originally  came  from  three 
islands,  HawaiJd,  Mata  te  ra,  and  Wairota,  all  which  lay  to 
the  East.  The  hills  of  those  islands  were  covered  with 
kumara,  which  grew  spontaneously,  a quarrel  caused  them 
to  leave,  but  there  was  no  fighting,  being  without  weapons, 
and  not  a warlike  race,  they  came  in  a fleet  of  canoes,  and 
first  landed  at  Wa/iapu,  near  the  East  Cape ; in  the  third 
generation  Po  came  to  his  part,  to  Taimaro ; in  a neigh- 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


395 


bouring  island  there  were  beasts  which  carried  men  on 
their  backs,  and  in  some  of  those  islands  there  were  axes 
haying  holes  in  them,  through  which  the  handles  were 
thrust,  and  so  did  not  require  tying  on,  as  their  native 
stone  hatchets  did  ; that  in  one  island  in  their  vicinity 


A MAORI  ADZE. 


AN  AUSTRALIAN  AXE. 


ANCIENT  EGYPTIAN  ADZE. 


there  were  men  whose  skins  were  perfectly  black,  who  went 
without  clothing,  and  did  not  so  much  as  wear  an  apron 
before  them  ; and  also  in  another  isle,  there  were  men  who 
had  sandy  hair;  they  had  nuts,  with  oil  in  them  (cocoa), 
and  had  cloth  made  of  the  bark  of  trees,  ante , tapa ; 
they  brought  the  tapu  with  them  ( i.e .,  their  religion), 
and  it  grew  with  them,  formerly  they  were  not  cannibals  ; 
this  horrid  custom  being  only  of  recent  origin,  having 
commenced  when  he  was  a little  boy,  it  arose  from  anger, 
and  not  from  extreme  hunger ; it  began  with  his  tribe, 
which  was  thence  called  patu ; they  did  not  tattoo  their 
faces  when  they  first  came,  but  used  to  mark  them  with 
charcoal,  * and  this  was  done  several  generations  after 
their  arrival,  tattooing  being  a late  invention.  This  was 
the  substance  of  the  information  f we  received  from  the 
old  chief  relative  to  his  forefathers ; he  likewise  said  that 
he  remembered  the  coming  of  Captain  Cook,  who  stood  off 
Doubtless  Bay,  and  sent  a boat  on  shore  for  fire-wood  ; they 


* Even  now,  when  they  go  to  war,  the  young  men  thus  disfigure  their  faces 
with  charcoal. 

f Rev.  Joseph  Matthews. 


396 


ORIGIN,  AS  TRACED  BY  LANGUAGE. 


landed,  planted  potatoes,  and  sowed  cabbage  and  turnip 
seed ; one  of  tbe  natives  went  on  board ; they  were  much 
alarmed  lest  be  should  be  eaten ; they  received  presents  of 
red  cloth ; he  said  he  was  then  old  enough  “ to  catch  a fish 
and  cook  it.39 

Before  iron  axes  were  brought  to  the  country,  all  used  to 
laugh  at  him  about  the  tradition  of  there  being  any  which 
had  handles  fastened  on  without  being  tied,  supposing  it  was 
impossible,  and  thinking  the  tradition  was  only  an  idle  tale 
of  their  forefathers,  to  excite  their  wonder ; their  ideas 
were  the  same  about  there  being  animals  which  carried 
men.  This  old  chief  accompanied  some  of  his  people  to 
Waimate,  and  there  saw  a horse  for  the  first  time,  with 
one  riding  it,  he  was  greatly  delighted,  and  reminded  his 
followers  of  their  traditions,  saying.  You  would  not  believe 
me  about  the  beasts  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  whence 
our  fathers  came,  but  you  see  I was  right.  In  the  north,  the 
memory  of  Captain  Cook  is  much  revered,  but  that  of 
Governor  King  far  more  so ; he  is  spoken  of  with  great 
affection ; it  was  by  him  that  pigs  were  first  introduced  into 
that  part  of  New  Zealand,  they  were  a very  large  breed; 
some  got  into  their  sacred  groves  and  rooted  amongst  the 
dead,  for  which  they  were  shot,  the  others  were  used  as  horses, 
the  natives  taking  them,  perhaps,  for  the  wonderful  animals 
their  forefathers  spoke  of,  and  so  hard  did  they  try  to  use 
them  as  such,  that  they  were  all  soon  killed.  Governor 
King  visited  the  north  end  of  the  island,  and  it  was  his 
kindness  to  two  natives,  Huru  and  Toki,  who  were  carried 
to  Norfolk  Island  to  teach  the  prisoners  the  way  of  manufac- 
turing flax  from  the  jpJiormium  tenax , which  endeared  him  to 
the  natives,  and  was,  under  Providence,  the  cause  of  the 
Gospel  being  brought  to  this  island  ; on  such  apparently 
trifling  circumstances  do  the  greatest  events  often  depend  ! 
Mr.  Marsden's  first  desire  to  send  Missionaries  to  New 
Zealand,  arose  from  his  there  meeting  with  those  two  natives, 
and  being  struck  with  their  superior  intelligence ; they  were 
afterwards  sent  back  to  their  country,  enriched  with  presents, 
and  the  natives  of  that  part  boast  that  they  were  the  first  who 


AFFINITY  OF  WORDS. 


397 


received  Europeans  with  kindness,  and  indeed  they  have  in- 
variably done  so,  never,  except  in  one  single  case,  having 
injured  any  who  landed  on  their  shores.  It  was  by  those 
further  south,  at  Wangaroa  and  the  Bay  of  Islands,  that 
they  were  ill-treated.  When  Toki  and  Huru  returned,  the 
natives  flocked  around  them,  and  were  anxious  to  learn  how 
the  Europeans  had  behaved  to  them,  and  on  hearing  of  the 
uniform  kindness  they  had  received,  it  made  such  an  impres- 
sion in  favor  of  Englishmen  as  never  to  be  erased  from  their 
memory. 

The  natives  of  the  north,  above  Kaitaia,  state,  that  the 
first  wheat  which  was  sowed  in  the  island  was  by  Governor 
King,  at  Kapo  Wairua,  where  he  landed. 

In  all  languages,  some  words  may  be  found  which  resemble 
those  in  another ; this,  of  course,  is  the  case  with  those 
tongues  which  have  derived  much  either  from  neighbour- 
ing countries,  or  in  common  with  them,  from  some  more 
ancient  one,  as  is  seen  in  most  European  languages  ; but 
when  this  resemblance  or  identity  of  words  exists  in  such 
a remote  and  isolated  race  as  the  Maori,  and  that,  too, 
with  European  tongues,  then  it  can  only  be  accounted  for  by 
supposing  that  there  is  a natural  tendency  in  the  human 
race  to  adopt  the  same  symbols,  a natural  unity  of  thought, 
arising  from  causes  common  to  all ; for  example,  when  poultry 
were  first  introduced  into  New  Zealand,  they  immediately 
gave  the  cock  a name  from  its  crow,  ti  kao  kao , as  our 
ancestors  also  have  done  : one  people  deriving  its  name 
from  the  crow,  the  other  from  its  cluck  ; so  with  the  duck, 
which  is  most  likely  derived  from  its  quack  ; the  natives 
adopting  the  same  sound  to  the  idiom  of  their  language,  call 
it  rake  rake , which  is  nothing  more  than  quack  quack. 

In  fact,  all  the  birds  of  New  Zealand  are  named  from  their 
notes,  and  this  seems  quite  natural ; when  our  settlers  first 
reached  New  Zealand,  they  fancied  that  the  cry  of  the  owl 
resembled  the  words  more  pork,  and  more  pork  they  call 
it;  the  natives  of  the  north  fancy  its  note  resembles  the 
word  kou-kou , and  that  is  its  name  there  : in  the  south,  they 


398 


AFFINITY  OF  WORDS. 


think  it  sounds  like  ru-ru,  and  so  it  is  called ; but  although 
in  this  instance  there  is  so  much  difference,  yet  in  many 
others  there  may  be  a remarkable  resemblance  of  thought, 
and  we  may  meet  with  similar  words  in  most  remote  languages, 
which  are  evidently  derived  from  sound ; thus,  in  New  Zealand, 
the  beautiful  word  ha-ru-ru  is  taken  from  the  shaking  or  vi- 
bratory sound  of  water,  the  noise  of  the  surf ; ha,  the  breath, 
is  the  natural  aspiration ; ru,  the  simple  word  to  shake,  and 
the  re- duplication  increases  its  power ; ru  has  thus  naturally 
become  the  term  for  an  earthquake,  which  has  a similar 
motion  to  that  of  a wave.  In  general,  however,  it  must  be 
evident,  that  when  similar  words,  which  cannot  be  traced  to 
sound,  occur,  there  must  have  been  some  previous  connec- 
tion of  the  languages,  although  the  remembrance  of  it  may 
have  long  since  passed  away.  A most  interesting  word  is 
taki,  to  track ; it  appears  remarkable  that  these  two  words, 
which  are  not  very  dissimilar  in  sound,  should  both  alike 
possess  two  very  different  meanings  ; taki  being  to  hawl  a 
canoe  by  a line,  which  is  likewise  the  legitimate  meaning 
of  the  English  word ; taki  is  also  to  trace  or  track  a man  by 
his  footmarks,  and  so  is  the  English  word  to  track;  both 
also  mean  a track  made  by  footsteps ; this  resemblance 
can  scarcely  be  a chance  one.  Haere,  to  go,  is  another  ; 
it  is  the  same  in  Latin,  ire,  with  a like  signification,  so 
in  the  Old  English,  hie  ; hiegan,  Saxon  ; allez,  French. 
The  word  pat  a,  to  patter  as  rain,  or  drop  as  water,  is 
another,  which  seems  to  present  a singular  resemblance 
to  the  European  one ; from  pata  may  be  derived  the  word 
patu,  to  batter  or  strike,  and  the  French  battu ; tu  also 
signifies  to  strike ; and  here  again  we  have  the  same  in  tue, 
French,  to  kill,  and  the  Greek  tottw  ; and  again  in  tutu, 
when  one  stands  against  another  as  an  adversary.  Ta 
implies  mildness,  but  tu  intensity,  to  strike,  hence  pata  is 
converted  into  patu,  to  express  war. 

To  give  one  more  instance,  from  u,  the  nipple  of  the 
breast,  to  which  the  infant  clings  for  its  support,  is  de- 
rived to  hold ; the  canoe,  when  it  touches  the  land,  is  said 
to  u,  or  hold  the  land  ; hence  uta  the  shore ; from  u to  hold, 


MONOSYLLABIC  ROOTS. 


399 


and  to  to  touch  or  strike,  also  utaina  to  land ; nranga  the 
anchorage,  hia  u to  hold  on,  wai  u,  water  of  the  breast, 
or  milk;  uma  the  breast;  nmu  an  oven,  whence  food  is 
drawn  for  man,  as  it  is  for  the  infant  from  the  uma. 
Ur ung a a pillow,  to  which  the  head  clings  for  rest ; urungi 
the  paddle  used  in  steering,  which  causes  the  canoe  to  hold 
on  its  course;  utu,  revenge,  payment  from  u to  cling,  or  hold 
on  to,  and  tu  to  stand  up  as  a foe,  utu  to  draw  water ; and 
many  more  derivatives  might  be  produced,  such  as  ua,  rain, 
which  is  the  nipple  of  the  sky  above,  i.e.,  the  cloud.  This 
root  is  preserved  in  ovOap  (Gr.),  uber  (Lat.),  and  in  the  Eng- 
lish words  udder  and  bosom. 


It  is  unnecessary  to  multiply  examples  of  this  kind.  The 
subjoined  list  of  words  will  afford  the  philologist  matter  for 
consideration  : — 


Ahi  (Maori.) 


Ai 

Ai 

Amo 


99 

99 


Apo  ,, 

Atua,  Etua  ,, 

Auri  , , 

Awa  „ 

Dua,  or  rua.  ,, 

Haere  , , 

Ha 

Hamuti  , , 

Hapai  , , 

Hapainga  , , 

Hari  , , 

Haruru  ,, 

Haro  ,, 

Haua  , , 


fire  ignis  (Latin.)  aghni  (Sanscrit.)  aghna  (Er.)  igni 
(Lat.)  agni  (Sclav.) 

(Gr.)  aigan  (Gothic.)  to  have,  to  possess  (Eng.) 
aio  (Lat.)  to  say  (Eng.)  aye,  yes 

a — m — n (Hebrew)  implies  nurturing,  fostering,  to  sup- 
port, sustain,  (amun-ra  Jupiter  Ammon),  the  lower 
part  of  the  arm,  hence  to  carry  (Eng. ) 
avarus  (Lat.)  greedy  (Eng.) 

Deus  (Lat.)  Dewa  (Sans.)  God  (Eng.) 
an  ornament  made  from  a whale’s  tooth,  inaures  (Lat.) 
ear-rings. 

aven  (Welsh.)  aqua  (Lat.)  ah wa  (Goth.)  awin  (Gaelic. ) 
a river  (Eng. ) 

8va)  (Gr. ) duo  (Lat.)  deux  (French.)  dwi(San.)  two  (Eng.) 
twa  (Scot.) 

ire  (Lat.)  allez  (Fr.)  heya  (Goth.)  hiegan  (Sax.)  hie 
(old  Eng.)  to  go  (Eng.) 

to  breathe.  aa(Sans.)  anima  (Latin.)  than  or  jan  (Goth.) 
taen  (Celt.) 

mutir  (Fr.)  to  mute  or  dung,  a water  closet  (Eng.) 
avafSaivu,  air tco  (Gr.)  haf-yan  (Goth.)  lift  up,  help, 
ascend,  (Eng.) 
gero  (Lat.)  carry  (Eng.) 
noise  of  wind,  haruah,  wind  (Heb. ) 
to  comb  flax,  harrow  the  ground  (Eng. ) 
to  be  hewed  (Eng.)  hakek  (Heb.)  to  hack. 


400 


MONOSYLLABIC  BOOTS. 


He  (Maori.) 
Hekina  , , 

Hine  , , 


Hipa 

Hohoro 

Homai 

Hua 

Hui 

Huka 

Huna 

Huri 

Ika 

Iti  iti 

Iwi 

Ka 

Kakano 

Kano 

Kapo 

Kapura 

Keriru 

Kukupa 

Ko  wai 

Kai 

Karanga 


> 5 


9 9 
99 
9 9 
99 


9 9 
9 9 


9 9 

Karere  ,, 

Kawa  , , 

Kete  „ 


Kiko  kiko  ,, 
.Kiri 
Ko 

Kohatu  , , 
Kokonga  , , 
Kokonga  ,, 
Koro  , , 

Korero  , , 
Koroheke  ,, 
Kowatu  , , 
Kuia  ,, 


Kumete 

Kuri 

Kutikuti 

Kutu 

Maha 


a (pron.  the  English  article  a.) 
echinus  (Lat.)  a see  egg  (Eng.) 

(old  Eng.)  gean  (Celt.)  queno  (Goth.)  gena  (Sclav.) 
quean,  gin  (Austr.)  zhena  (Russian.)  zane  or  ghena 
(Sans.)  girl  (Eng.)  ywr)  (Gr.)  gunyeh,  a house  (Aust.) 
heap  (Eng.) 

curro  (Lat.)  hurry  (Eng.) 

StSco-uat  (Gr.)  do  (Lat.)  da’  homai  (Sans.)  to  give  (Eng.) 
<j)epoo  (puca  (Gr.)  to  beget,  to  bear  fruit  (Eng.) 
to  assemble,  huui  (Chinese)  society, 
hookhah  (Turkish.)  froth,  snow  (Eng.) 
to  hide  (Eng.) 

Xv\lu)  (Gr.)  to  turn  (Eng.) 

(Gr.)  ikan  (Malay.)  fish  (Eng.) 
little  (Eng.) 
bone,  Eve  (Eng.) 

kcuoo  (Gr.)  khan  (Sans.)  to  burn  (Eng.) 
kokos  (Gr.)  a corn,  kernel  (Eng.) 
a kind  (Eng.) 

capio,  carpo  (Lat.)  to  crop,  take  (Eng.) 

Trvp  (Gr.)  fire  (Eng.)  ur  (Heb.)  light  or  fire. 

| Columba  pigeon. 

who  pronounced  qui  (Lat. ) ko  (Sans.) 

Kypris,  ceres,  abundance,  food. 

kara  (Heb.)  /caAew  (Gr.)  to  cry.  to  call  (Eng.) 

KVpvti'C Gr.)  a herald,  clangor  (Eng.) 
nripv£  (Gr.)  messenger  (Eng.) 
sawer  (Teutonic.)  sour  (Eng.) 

pa-kete  (Anglo-Maori.)  basket,  kit  (Eng.)  katty  (Chi- 
nese) small  box. 

Kpeas  (Gr.)  carnis  (Lat.)  flesh  (Eng.) 

cortex  (Lat.)  bark  (Eng.) 

ko  (Mexican.)  the  native  spade,  hoe  (Eng.) 

Cephas,  keba,  or  giver  (Austra.  N.S.W.)  stone. 
kovis  (Gr.)  cinis  (Lat.)  cinder  (Eng.) 
corner  (Eng.) 

) speak,  corobory  (Austr. ) clamo  (Lat. ) carbery  (Ma- 
) dagascar. ) 

y epos  (Gr.)  old  man  (Eng.) 

Cephas,  keba  or  giber,  a stone. 

yvj/e  (Gr.)  quay,  or  quee  (N.  A.  Indians.)  old  woman, 
quean,  term  of  respect  (Eng. ) queen, 
thibet  (Heb.)  ark,  bowl  (Eng.) 
kv wv  (Gr.)  cani(Lat.)  cuan  (Sans.)  cur  (Eng.) 
to  cut  with  scissors  (Eng.) 
cutio  (Lat.)  wood-louse. 

great,  many,  much,  maha  (Sans.)  mogu  (Sclav.)  fieya 
(Gr.)  magna(Lat.)  meikle  (Scot.)  mekels  (Goth.) 


MONOSYLLABIC  ROOTS. 


401 


Mahi  (Maori.) 
Mana  , , 

Mangai  ,, 

Maori  ,, 

Marama  , , 
Marino  „ 

Moana  ,, 

Mate  , , 


Matua 

Motu 

Ngau 

Ora 

Pa,  Papa 
Paraha 
Pare,  pa 


Parirau 

Pata 

Patu 

Poki 

Pono 

Pu,  tupu 

Pua 

Puha 

Ra 

Raki  raki 
Rangatira 


9 9 


9 9 
99 
9 9 
9 9 
9 9 
9 9 


Rae 


Rangi 

Remu 

Rere 

Rete 

Ripi 

Ripo 

Riri 


9 9 
99 
99 
99 


Rite 

Rite 

Rite 

Ta 

Tai 

Taimaha 

Taki 


? 9 


mekin  (Heb.)  machina  (Lat.)  work,  make  (Eng.) 
power,  lordship,  manor,  manorial, 
manger  (Fr.)  to  munch,  mouth  (Eng.) 
mauri  (Lat.)  moor,  native  (Eng.) 
marahma  (Turkish)  light. 

(calm,  smooth,  unruffled  surface  of  the  sea.)  marine  (Eng.) 
sea.  meer  mira  (Sans.)  mare  (Lat.)  more  (Sclav.) 
meer  mur  (Welsh.) 

death,  moth  (Heb.)  mord  (Ger.)  mors  morte  (Lat.) 
murthur,  morgue  (Fr.)  mauthr  (Goth.)  maithrine 
(Sans.)  death,  murder  (Eng.)  mar  (Zend.)  mri 
(Sclav.) 

mother  madua.  mater  (Lat. ) 

malgun  (Heb.)  malgun  (Aust.  N.  S.  W.)  to  cut  off. 

KvaS)  (Gr.)  gnaw  (Eng.) 

health,  life.  capo.  (Gr.)  hour  hora  (Lat.)  aura. 
af-l) 3a  (Gr.)  papa  (Eng.) 
planus  (Lat.)  a plain  (Eng.) 

(a  fortification  in  New  Zealand.)  a stoppage,  a bar,  to 
parry  or  ward  off  an  enemy  (Eng. ) 
irerepov  tt repov  (Gr.)  wing,  feathers,  (Eng.) 
to  patter,  as  water  dropping,  drops  of  rain  (Eng.) 
battue,  battre  (Lat.)  battu,  beaten,  to  beat  batter  (Eng.) 
to  poke  in  earth  over  an  oven  (Eng.) 
pono  (Lat.)  to  place  confidence  in.  truth  (Eng.) 

<pva>  (Gr.)  bhu  (Sans.)  to  spring,  to  be,  to  shoot  (Eng.) 
bread  of  bulrush,  pollen,  bua  (E.  Indian.) 
gills  of  fish  (Eng.) 

sun.  Ra  (Egypt.)  svar  (Sans.)  heavens  to  shine, 
to  rake  (Eng.) 

ra  sun — ngatira  companies,  the  light,  or  chief  of  men. 

rajah  (Sans.)  a chief  (Eng.)  raj -rule  rex,  king, 
forehead,  brow,  bhru  (Sans.)  otypv  (Gr.)  browe  (Sclav.) 

prawa  (Goth.)  brai  (Celt.) 
ovpavos  (Gr.)  langi  (Malay.)  heaven  (Eng.) 
rim  or  hem  of  a garment  (Eng.) 

rir  (Heb.)  pew  (Gr.)  reo  (Lat.)  to  flow,  to  fly  (Eng.) 
rete  (Lat.)  net  (Eng.) 
ripi  ripi,  to  rip. 

rivis,  a river  fFr.)  ripple  (Eng.) 

here  (Heb.)  epis  (Gr.)  ira  (Lat.)  anger,  ire  (Eng.) 

riden  (Cumberland  dialect.) 
a rite,  custom,  ceremony  (Eng.)  straight,  correct, 
recte  (Lat.)  straight  (Eng.) 
right  (Eng.) 
tap,  touch  (Eng.) 
tide  (Eng.) 

m.na  (Heb.)  p.va  (Gr.)  mina  (Lat.)  weight  (Eng.) 
track  (Eng.) 


L D 


402 


MONOSYLLABIC  ROOTS. 


Tane  (Maori. ) 

avrip  (Gr.)  a man  (Eng.) 

Tango 

99 

Tiyco  (Gr.)  tango  (Lat.)  to  take  (Eng.) 

Tara 

9 9 

Oappeco  (Gr.)  to  dare  (Eng.) 

Tari  or  tatari 

>99 

tardo  (Lat)  tardy,  tarry  (Eng.) 

Tatu 

>9 

to  mark  the  skin  by  striking,  the  tattoo,  the  striking  on 
a drum,  from  ta,  to  strike  (Eng.) 

Tawiri 

9 f 

to  twist,  to  wring,  as  clothes  (Eng.) 

Te 

9 9 

the  (Eng.) 

Tika 

„ 

Aikcuos  A iKrj  (Gr.)  dica  (Lat.)  just  (Eng.) 

Tiki 

99 

a god.  Tii  (Poly.)  Dii  (Lat.)  gods. 

Tini 

99 

6 ip  (Gr.)  many  (Eng.) 

To 

99 

to  tow  a boat  (Eng.) 

Toa 

9 9 

tough,  strong  (Eng.) 

Toru 

99 

rpeis  (Gr. ) tres  (Lat. ) trois  (Fr.)  tre  (Ital.)  tri  (Sans.) 
three  (Eng.) 

Tu 

9 9 

tvtttm  (Gr.)  tuer  (Fr.)  to  kill,  to  strike  (Eng. ) 

Uma 

99 

ovdap  (Gr.)  uber  (Lat.)  udder,  breast,  bosom  (Eng.) 

TJ  mu 

99 

cavos  (Gr.)  oven  (Eng. ) 

Wa,  wahanga  ,. 

veho,  vehiculum  (Lat.)  wahana  (Goth.)  to  carry  on 
the  shoulders,  waggon,  wain  (Eng.) 

Wahine 
Wai,  water, 

99 

yvpr)  (Gr.)  woman,  or  carrying  woman,  a mother  (Eng.) 

) uda  (Sans.)  voda  (Sclav.)  vato  (Goth.)  dwr  (Celt.) 

wet 

9 9 

> Wseter  (Sax.)  vdcop  (Gr.)  mai  (Ethiopic ) Wasser 

Ua  rain 

99 

) (Goth.)  vazar  (0.  H.  S.)  wasser  (Ger.) 

Waka 

9 9 

fac  (Lat.)  fhaka  (Tonga.)  to  make  or  cause  (Eng ) 

Wata 

99 

watt  (Burmah)  a store  house. 

Watitoka 

99 

fytoka  (Tonga.)  pagoda  (India,  Burmah. ) dagoba 
(Ceylon  temple.) 

In  the  New  Zealand  tongue  many  are  surprised  to  find 
how  easily  they  may  be  mistaken  in  some  words,  which  seem 
to  be  real  Maori,  when  they  are  only  introduced  ones ; to 
find  out  whether  they  are  so  or  not,  it  is  necessary  to  discover 
their  roots,  for  there  are  few  words  in  the  language  which 
may  not  thus  be  traced  to  monosyllabic  origin. 

For  instance,  there  is  one  word  admitted  into  our  trans- 
lation of  the  Testament  which  it  is  doubtful  whether  the 
translators,  though  the  best  Maori  scholars,  ever  suspected 
was  anything  but  a genuine  Maori  one,  and  that  is  toro- 
naihi, a sickle.  Wondering  what  this  toronaihi  could  be 
originally,  as  they  had  nothing  like  a sickle,  or  anything 
sharper  than  a green-stone  adze,  or  hatchet,  I put  the  ques- 
tion to  an  intelligent  native,  who  laughed,  and  said,  “ Why, 
don’t  you  know,  it  is  one  of  your  own  words  V’  I expressed 
my  ignorance.  He  said,  that  the  toronaihi  is  the  sharp  knife 


MONOSYLLABIC  ROOTS. 


403 


which  whalers  use  to  cut  up  blubber  with— the  drawknife. 
The  word  has  been  naturalized  perhaps  for  half  a century ; 
and  since  that  little  destructive  animal,  the  mouse,  has  so 
increased,  as  to  become  a pest,  for  it  cuts  down  the  ripened 
wheat  with  its  sharp  teeth,  and  so  clean,  that,  it  almost 
appears  to  have  been  done  with  a knife ; the  natives  have 
bestowed  upon  it  the  name  of  toronaihi , as  being  most 
descriptive  of  its  destructive  powers. 

It  appears  probable  the  language  was  originally  monosyl- 
labic; many  of  the  words  in  Maori  may  be  traced  to  simple 
roots,  and  not  a few  of  these  will  be  recognized  as  those  in 
other,  and  far  distant  languages  ; a few  are  here  given  : — • 

Ka — to  burn.  Ka-pura,  seeds  of  burning  fire.  Ka-pura,  seed. 
Ka-kano,  seed  or  grain.  Ka-ha,  strength,  i.e.,  breath  of  fire. 

Ku — narrowing.  Ku-iti,  narrow.  Ku-raru  raru , jammed  up 
with  business.  Ku-ku , to  pinch.  Ku-rehe,  to  fold  up  clothes, 
wrinkles.  Ku-kuti,  to  crouch  down.  Ku-mu ,.  anus.  Ku-ku , a 
shrinking  dread  ; pinching  up.  Ku-papa,  to  crouch  down. 

JV£ — seems  to  imply  the  bending  of  the  leaf,  as  the  cocoa-nut 
leaf ; an  arch,  as  of  the  mouth.  Ni-ho,  tooth.  A-ni-wa-ni-wa , 
rainbow  ; the  water  arch. 

Pa — a fence  ; to  touch  ; ward  off ; turn  aside.  Pa-tu , to  touch, 
so  as  to  wound.  Pa-re,  to  ward  off.  Pa-ia , to  turn  or  push  aside, 
a fence.  Pa-re-pa-re,  a fortification  ; a barrier  to  push  away  the 
enemy  ; hence,  Pa-reare,  to  push  away  the  snow  ; a sandal.  Pa-re, 
a fillet,  or  bandage  for  the  head.  Taia-pa,  a fence. 

Po — night,  season  ; a measure  of  time.  Po-uri,  darkness  (the 
offspring  of  night).  Mata-po,  blind  (the  eyes  of  night).  Po-ka,  a 
pit,  to  dig  into  a bank  ; to  force  through  any  obstruction.  Po-kake, 
to  force  in  an  opposite  direction.  Po-ka-noa,  to  break  through,  or 
do  any  thing  without  leave  ; officious. 

Pei — to  hinder;  to  jump.  A-rei,  a skreen.  Pei-nga , the  skreen 
between  this  world  and  the  next,  or  a jumping-place.  Pei-rei-rua, 
the  double  jump,  or  to  gallop. 

Pi — root  of  Ri-nga-ri-nga,  hand.  Ri-ma,  five.  Tu-ri,  knee. 
Pi-ake,  to  lift,  raise.  Pi-ri,  anger,  or  any  weapon  of  war,  from 
the  agent  ri.  Pi-aka,  to  strain  the  hand  in  labour.  Pi-e,  two,  the 
two  arms. 


dd2 


404 


MONOSYLLABIC  ROOTS. 


Kakahu — a garment  to  keep  the  body  warm. 

Ta — to  strike,  to  print,  to  tap.  Ta-too  (properly  Ta-tu),  to  make 
strokes  that  stand  or  remain,  to  tatoo  by  striking  a small  chisel 
with  a hammer.  Ta-ia , strike  him.  Ta-tu,  to  count  by  strokes. 
Ta-tauranga,  the  act  of  striking,  or  fighting.  Ta-piri,  an  assistant ; 
patch  or  thing  added. * 

Tau — to  alight  as  a bird  ; to  arrive  ; a year.  Tau-hou,  a stranger. 
Tau-tangata,  a foreigner.  Tau-tohe,  a quarrel,  when  one  views 
another  as  a stranger,  anciently  syn.  with  enemy.  Tau-reka-reka, 
to  fall  into  one’s  power  as  a captive,  sweet  for  food,  Syn.  he-mokai, 
which  is  both  a pet  and  also  food,  as  birds,  pigs,  and  slaves,  kept 
as  pets  until  they  are  fat  enough  to  kill,  hence  mokai,  dried  heads. 
Tau-ki,  a proverb  or  saying.  Tau-ke,  a separate  place. 

Tu — the  standing  or  bearing  of  a person.  Tu-puna , to  stand, 
to  spring,  an  ancestor,  to  stand,  to  be  struck,  hence,  Tu-pu,  to 
grow,  to  spring,  Pa-tu,  to  touch,  to  strike.  Tu,  god  of  war, 
Tu-tu,  quarrelsome.  Tu-a,  to  stand  near  or  beyond  ; any  thing 
beloved,  Tu-a-kana,  an  elder  brother,  Tu-a-hine,  a sister,  Ma- 
tu-a,  parents.  Tu-a,  also  means  to  stand  beyond  or  behind,  A-tu-a, 
beyond,  as  a man’s  shadow,  hence,  a spirit,  the  shadow  of  man, 
God,  or  anything  beyond  our  comprehension,  a clock,  a compass, 
were  thus  viewed  as  an  A-tu-a.  Tu-a-tahi,  first  beyond  the  speaker, 
Tu-a-rua,  second,  &c.  Tu-a-whenua,  main  land,  spoken  by  a coast 
native,  the  land  beyond,  Ki-tu-a,  behind.  Tu-a-nga  huru,  tenth, 
Tu-ara,  the  back,  Tu-a-roa,  the  back  wall  of  a house, 

Wa — to  carry.  Wa-lia,  mouth  or  passage  of  the  breath. 

W ae — to  clear  a path,  by  laying  the  fern  on  either  side  with  the 
foot.  Wae,  the  entire  leg,  Wae-wae,  the  foot,  implies  motion, 
walking.  Wae-renga,  a clearing  in  the  forest. 


Ahi — fire;  to  beget.  Ahi-ahi,  time  for  lighting  fires,  i.e.,  even- 
ing. Taku-ahi,  my  fire  lighter  ; a name  for  a wife,  a producer  of 
posterity. 

Ahu — to  mould  the  earth  with  the  hand,  in  forming  kumara  hil- 
locks. Ahu-a,  likeness. 

Anga — to  incline.  Anga-anga,  the  skull  appears  to  be  derived 
from  the  child  crawling,  the  skull  being  always  inclined  to  the 
ground  ; hence,  Anga-atu,  to  incline  outwards. 

* Ta  is  still  used  as  a term  of  address  for  man,  as  e ta  ; it  also  signifies  to 
touch,  to  alight,  to  breathe. 


SIKAYANA  WORDS. 


405 


Are — implies  concavity,  or  over  hanging,  an  area.  Wli-are , house. 
Pu-are , open.  Tau  wh-are,  over  hanging.  Waka-are,  the  opening- 
up  of  the  horizon  after  rain,  leaving  a space  between  the  earth  and 
heaven,  for  the  wind  to  enter  in  and  clear  the  sky.  Are-are , ex- 
cavating, opening,  concave. 

Atea — empty,  white,  or  blank.  Whare-atea,  empty  house.  Pua- 
tea,  a white  plant. 

I — before  0,  will  almost  always  contain  the  idea  of  a curl,  as  Io, 
tough,  knotty,  curled  ; Io,  a lock  of  hair.  Awh-io,  giddy.  Awh-io- 
wh-io,  to  whirl  round.  K-oi-ngo  o ie  ngakau,  a wringing  or  thirsting 
of  the  heart.  Am-io-m-io,  syn.  Awh-io  wh-io. 

Iti — little.  Iti-iti,  a plural  adjective.  R-iki,  little.  Ririki,  plural 
adjective.  Iti-oioi,  very  small.  Iti-iho,  least.  Iti-rori  rori, 

Oe — tapering  to  a point.  Koe,  a spade.  Oe , a paddle. 

Re-hu — a flute ; dissolving  away,  fainting,  hazy,  soft,  mellow, 
dying  away.  Ko-rehu,  a haze.  Rehu-rehu , evening  twilight. 

Tama — child.  Tama-iti,  little  child.  Tama-hine , female  child. 
Tama-riki,  children.  E tama-ma , my  friends. 

Ura — red.  K-ura,  red  ochre.  Ko-ura,  Cray  fish.  Waka-ura,  to 
make  red,  to  blush.  Ura-nga  o te  ra,  redness  of  the  sky.  Rangi- 
ura,  red  sky.  Wai-kura,  rust.  Ura-ura,  sea-shore. 


A VOCABULARY  OF  SIKAYANA  WORDS. 

824  N.  Lat.,  163  E.  Lon. 


English . 


Sikayana . 


Maori. 


Man 

Woman 

Boy 

Girl 

Father 

Mother 

Old  man 

Son 


Tamali-kirriky 

Tama-’feeny 


Tanata 

Fafeeny 


Tilui  tanata 
Areeky 


Tamana 

Tinana 


Tangata 
Wahine 
Tama-riki,  pi. 
Tamahine 
Matua  tane,  papa 
Waea,  matua  whine 
Koroeke 

Tamaiti,  Ariki  chief 


Brother 


Sister 


Kawe 


Taeena 


Tuakana 

Upoko 

Huru 


Head 

Hair 

Face 

Brow 

Ear 

Eye 


De  bo  soulu 

Ladoo 

Lofee  mata 

Moa-lai 

Kaootalina 

Karimata 


Mata 

Rae 


Taringa 

Kanohi 


406 


SIKAYANA  WORDS 


English. 

Sikayana. 

Maori. 

Nose 

Kai-joosoo 

Ihu 

Mouth 

Moajoosoo 

Mangai 

Tongue 

Alydo 

Arero 

Tooth 

Niteho 

Niho 

Beard 

Babaee 

Pahau 

Arm 

Leema 

Amo 

Hand  or  finger 

Motikao 

Ringa  ringa,  matihao 

Belly 

Manawa 

Kopu  Manawa,  reins 

Thigh  or  leg 

Koo-na-waee 

Papa 

Toes 

Motikao-waee 

Waewae  matihao 

Bone 

Tay  eewee 

Iwi 

Blood 

Toto 

Toto 

Village 

Ta  kaeena 

Kainga 

Chief 

Alikee 

Ariki  rangatira 

House  or  hut 

Tamafalee 

Ware,  puni 

Cocoa  nut 

Nyoo 

Heaven 

Te  laoo 

Rangi 

Sun 

Te  lah 

Ra 

Moon 

Malama 

Marama 

Star 

Fatoo 

Wetu 

Light 

Taejao 

Marama  aotea 

Night 

Tepoh 

Te  po 

Darkness 

Pooori-taoo 

Pouritanga 

Evening 

Afee-afee 

Ahi  ahi 

Lightning 

Wooeela 

Uira 

Thunder 

Mana 

Watitiri 

Fire 

Afee 

Ahi,  kapura 

Water 

Wooaee 

Wai 

Earth — land 

Fanooa 

Whenua 

Sea — salt  water 

Wooaee-taee 

Wai  tai 

Hell 

Faka-maoona 

Reinga 

Island 

Tama-fanooa 

Motu 

Stone 

Fatoo 

Kowatu 

Tree 

Lagaoo 

Rakau 

Flesh 

Tayeeho 

Kiko  kiko 

Dog 

Kooree 

Kuri 

Egg 

Taf 

Ua 

Fish 

Eeka 

Ika 

Mosquito 

Namoo 

Wairoa,  namu,  sandfly 

White 

Mah 

Ma 

White  man 

Tamamah 

Pakeha 

Black 

Ooree 

Pango,  uri 

Black  man 

Lamaooree 

Maori 

Red 

Ayooee 

Keha,  kura 

Yellow 

Kikana 

Kowai 

Great 

Naneeoo 

Nui 

Small 

Likee-likee 

Iti,  riki  riki 

Strong 

Faee-mafee 

Kaha 

SIKAYANA  WORDS. 


407 


English . 

Sikayana. 

Maori . 

Y oung 

Taaney 

Taitamariki 

Young  man 

Tama-taaney 

Ditto 

Good 

Aylaooe 

Pai 

Far 

Mamad 

Tawiti 

Bad 

F a-keeno-keeno 

Ka  kino 

Beautiful 

Aylaooee 

Ataahua 

Dead 

Koomatee 

Kua  mate 

Bad  odour 

Puraoo 

Pirau,  haunga 

111 

Ayeesoo 

Mate 

Living 

Aylaooee 

Ora 

Cold 

Makalili 

Makariri 

Warm 

Mafana 

Mahana 

I,  me 

Enaoo 

Ahau,  koahau 

We 

Kohootdhoo 

Matou,  tatou 

Thou 

Akoee 

Kokoe 

All 

Kohootdhoo 

Katoa 

Who 

Say  a 

Kowai 

Who’s  there 

Saya-tay 

Kowai  tera 

To-day 

Tai-jaoo 

Inaienei,  aienei 

Yesterday 

Na-nafee 

Inanahi 

To-morrow 

Taya-soakee 

Apopo 

Yes 

Oh 

Ae,  ina 

No 

Sayaee 

Kahore 

One 

Taahee 

Kotahi 

Two 

Rooah 

Karua 

Three 

Torah 

Ka  torn 

Four 

Fah 

Ka  wa 

Five 

Leemah 

Ka  rima 

Six 

Ono 

Ka  ono 

Seven 

Feetoo 

Ka  witu 

Eight 

Waroo 

Ka  warn 

Nine 

Seewo 

Ka  iwa 

Ten 

Katawa 

Ka  te  kau 

Eleven 

Katawa-tahee 

Ka  ti  kau  ma  tahi 

Twelve 

Katawa-rooah 

Ka  ti  kau  ma  rua 

Thirteen 

Katawa-tora 

Ka  ti  kau  ma  toru 

Twenty 

Mata-rooah 

Ruate  kau 

Thirty 

Mata-torah 

Torutekau 

One  hundred 

Lou 

Rau 

Two  hundred 

Rooah-lou 

Rua  rau 

One  thousand 

Kutaioa-lou 

Kotahimano 

Eat 

Kaee 

Kai 

To  drink 

Oonoo 

Inu 

To  go 

Anaaoo 

Haere 

To  sleep 

Moi 

Moe 

To  come 

Anasani 

Haeremai 

To  sit 

Nofo 

Noho 

ee  as  i,  and  oo  as  u. 


TABLE  OF  POLYNESIAN  DIALECTS. 


408 


< 


POLYNESIAN  DIALECTS. 


NEW  ZEALAND  AND  POLYNESIAN  RACES. 


409 


The  following  Table  will  show  the  close  connexion  between 
the  natives  of  New  Zealand  and  the  Polynesian  race  in  general. 

Atua,  general  name  for  the  Deity  in  almost  all  the  islands  ; ten,  Aleutian 
isles. 

Aitua,  satisfaction  of  the  spirit , an  evil  omen  j Aitua,  Spirit , Samoan,  Raro- 
tonga ; Maitu,  Pan. 

Aka,  creeping  plant , a Hand ; Tonga,  Rarotanga,  Mangarewa,  Nukahiva, 
yaka,  a wild  yam. 

Akaaka,  root  of  a potato  ; Samoa,  Tahaiti,  Hawaii,  Vitia,  Tarawa. 

Hue,  general  name  for  the  pumpkin , melon , or  creeping  vine  ; Fue  Pohue, 
convolvulus  ; Fue  Fue,  wild  vine,  Sam.  ; Hue,  Nuk.,  Haw.  ; Pohuehue,  do  ; 
Pohue,  Tah. ; the  gourd  convol,  Braziliensis. 

Huhu,  moth  ; Uu,  Rar.,  Nuk.,  an  insect  of  the  beetle  kind. 

Hutu,  a tree , Phillocladus,  Trachamanoides , Tah.  and  Nuk.,  the  Barringtonia 
speciosa  ; Ifi,  Sam.  Ton.  ; ihi,  Nuk,  a species  of  Chestnut. 

Ipu,  calabash , cup  ; Sam.,  Tong.,  Nuk.,  Tah.,  Mang.,  Haw. 

Iro,  maggot , Ilo,  Haw.  ; Vio,  Tah.  ; Io  Nuk. 

Kaho,  and  Kakaho,  reed,  a rush  ; Kaho,  Tong.  ; Kakaho,  Tong.  ; Kakao, 
Mang. ; Aeho,  Tah. ; Ahuawa,  Haw. 

Kakana,  grain , food,  Fiji. 

Kakau,  handle  of  a tool , the  stalk  or  stem  of  a plant,  Nuk. ; Kau,  Tang.  ; 
Au,  Sam.,  Haw. 

Kawakawa  ; evidently  used  when  the  natives  first  arrived,  as  Cava  ; the 
memory  of  the  custom  is  preserved  in  the  names  of  places  where  they  used  to 
meet  for  drinking  it,  as  Kawaranga,  in  the  Thames. 

Kete,  basket , Rar.,  Mang.  ; Ete,  Sam.,  Haw. ; Kete  in  the  Tong,  and  in 
Vit.  it  is  the  stomach  or  belly. 

Kiri,  skin,  Rar.,  Kili,  Fiji ; Fakaafa,  Tong. ; Iri,  Tah.  ; Ili,  Haw.  ; Kii, 
Nuk.  ; a skin,  bark,  rind  ; also  a rasp  file,  originally  of  the  shark’s  skin. 

Kiore,  rat,  Mang.  ; Kiole,  Pau.  ; Iole,  Sam.,  Haw. 

Kirikiri,  gravel,  pebbles,  Tar.  ; Kilikili,  Iliili,  Sam.,  Haw. 

Ko,  native  spade,  Nuk. ; O,  Tah.,  Haw.,  Mexico. 

Kohia,  the  New  Zealand  passion  flower,  ohia,  the  eugenia  malaccensis 
(Hawaii). 

Kuku,  mussel,  shell-fish,  Tong.  ; uu,  Sam.,  Haw. 

Kuku , pigeon  ; Nuk.,  a green  dove. 

Kukupa,  pigeon,  Pau.  ; Uupa,  Tah. 

Kumara,  sweet  potato.  Batata  ; Kumara,  Mang.  ; Kumaa,  or  Kumawa,  Nuk. 
Umara,  Tah. ; Uala,  Haw. 

Kumete,  Umete,  Ubique,  wooden  bowl. 

Kupenga,  Upenga,  Upena,  Upea,  Ubique,  sieve , and  net. 

Kuri,  dog,  Rar.,  Mang. ; Kuli,  Tong. ; Uli,  Sam. ; Uri,  Tar, ; Koli  (FijiJ. 

Mai,  matre  tree ; Mai,  Mea,  Tong,,  Mang.,  Nuk.,  Tar.  ; Maiere,  Tah., 
Mang.,  Pau.  ; Aeiore,  Haw.  ; breadfruit  tree. 

Mahana,  warm  ; Tah.,  the  sun,  a day. 

Marae  ; properly  the  court  before  the  Tohunga’s  house  ; it  applied  to  any 
open  space  in  a pa  ; in  Tahaiti,  it  is  a sacred  enclosure  ; Mara  (Fiji),  a burial 
place. 


410 


NEW  ZEALAND  AND  POLYNESIAN  RACES. 


Miro,  Podocarpus  ferrugenea,  Tah.  ; Mo,  Nuk. ; a tree,  Thespicia  popul- 
neae. 

Moa,  New  Zealand,  large  extinct  bird  ; Ubique,  the  common  fowl. 

Parana,  sperm  whale ; Palaaoa,  Haw. ; Paaoa,  Nuk. ; Mang.,  same  as  New 
Zealand  and  Tahaiti. 

Poepoe,  ball  used  in  play  : a round  thing  ; Fae,  Tong.,  Haw.,  Rar.  ; Poe, 
Rar.,  Mang.,  a pearl. 

Pona,  knot , Sami,  Rar.,  Nuk.,  Haw.,  the  parts  of  a sugar  cane  between  the 
joints. 

Ponapona,  joint ; Pona,  Nuk, 

Pungawerewere,  spider ; Punavelevele,  Haw.  ; Punaveevee,  Nuk. 

Rae,  Lae,  Ae,  Ubique,  forehead. 

Rata,  tree  ; Lata,  Tah.,  Tuscarpus  edulis  ; Lata,  Tong.,  a tree,  Metrosideros 
robusta. 

Rau,  a leaf,  Rar.,  Mang.,  Pau.  ; Lau,  La.,  Sam. ; Lau,  Lou,  Tong.  ; Lau, 
Hau.  ; Au,  Ou,  Nuk.  ; Ndrau,  Ndra,  Vit.  ; a leaf,  foliage,  raurau,  Tah. 

Roromi  } Press>  or  S(lueeze  J Lomi,  Lolomi,  Omi  to  shampoo. 

Rongomai,  a New  Zealand  god ; Tahaiti,  Te  Rongo,  Orono  Haw. 

Roro,  brain  ; Oo,  Nuk.,  the  core  of  the  breadfruit ; Lolo,  Sam.,  the  kernel 
of  the  old  cocoanut  ; Lolololo,  fat ; Lolo,  Tong.,  oil,  oily,  Haw. 

Rororoi,  kind  of  pudding,  formed  of  mashed  kumara  or  potatoe  ; Loloi, 
Tong.;  Tutolo,  Haw.  ; Turoro,  Mang.,  a pudding  in  which  cocoa-nut  oil  is  an 
ingredient. 

R.uru,  owl ; Lulu,  Sam.,  Tong.,  Vit. 

Tapa,  cloth  (Tahaiti),  New  Zealand,  a piece  for  a patch. 

Taro,  arum ; Talo,  Tao,  Ubique. 

Ti,  throughout  the  islands,  name  of  a tree  in  New  Zealand, , Dracena 
Australis, 

Toa,  a tree  (Tonga),  Toa. 

Tohora,  black  whale,  Tah.,  Haw.  ; Tafola,  Sam.,  Fak. ; Tafoa,  Tong. 

Tupapaku,  dead  body ; Tupapau,  Tah. 

Uri,  fruit  of  the  kiekie ; Kulu,  Niua,  Kuru,  Rar.  Paiuru,  Tah.;  Ulu, 
Haw.,  the  breadfruit. 

Uwhi-ufi,  yam  (Tonga),  potatoe  (N.Z.) 

Wai,  stingy  ray  (Tonga),  fy, 

Wata,  stand,  or  raised  platform  for  food  ; Fata,  Tah. 

W au,  paper  mulberry ; a tree  said  by  the  natives  to  have  been  originally 
brought  with  them  ; from  its  inner  bark,  they  formerly  made  a kind  of  cloth 
used  by  females'  as  a cincture  for  the  hair  ; Fau,  Sam.,  Tong.,  Nuk.,  the  hibiscus 
liliaceus , a tree  from  whose  bark  the  natives  make  twine  ; Vau,  Vit.  ; the 
hibiscus  ; the  cincture  worn  by  women  is  made  from  its  bark  ; Fau,  Fak. ; Pau, 
Haw. 

Wiwi,  rush;  Wi,  Tafifi,  Tah.  ; Tau,  Rar. ; Tahihi,  Haw. ; Tawiwi,  to  en- 
snare, entangle,  to  be  entangled  in  the  rushes. 


TRIBES,  POPULATION,  AND  CUSTOMS  OP  NEW  ZEALAND.  411 


TABLE  OF  THE  TRIBES  AND  POPULATION  OF  NEW 
ZEALAND. 


Names. 

Locality. 

Numbers. 

Aupouri  - 

North  Cape,  Three  Kings,  Wangaroa  Bay- 

400 

Rarawa  - 

Kaitaia,  Hokianga  - 

2,000 

Nga  Puhi 

Wangaroa,  Bay  of  Islands,  Hokianga 

6,000 

Nga  ti  Whatua 

Kaipara  Manukau  Waitemata 

4,000 

Na  ti  Tama  - 

Rotorua  - 

500 

Nga  te  Paoa  - 

Gulf  of  Hauraki  - 

1,000 

Na  ti  W aka  we 

Rotorua  - 

4,000 

Waikato 

Manukau,  Aotea-Kawia  - 
Waingaroa  Waipa,  Waikato 

4.000 

2.000 

Matamata,  Mokau  - 

4,000 

Maunga  Tautari  - 

2,000 

Nga  ti  Maru  - 

Thames  - - - - - 

1,000 

Na  te  Pehi 

Taupo  and  Wanganui  - 

2,000 

Nga  ti  Ruanui 

Taranaki 

Nga  Rua  hine 

Tangahoe  Nga  Rauru  - 

2,000 

Nga  ti  Apa 

Wangaihu  Rangitikei  - 

600 

Nga  ti  Hau 

Wanganui  - 

600 

Nga  ti  Potama 

Wanganui  - 

3,000 

Nga  ti  Rauru  - 

Wanganui  - - ...  - 

Nga  ti  Ruaka 

Wanganui  - 

Nga  ti  tahi 

Upper  Wanganui  - 

2,000 

Nga  ti  Kura  - 

Wakatane  - - - - - 

4,000 

Mua-upoko 

Panari  Manawatu  - 

1,000 

Nga  ti  Awa  - 

E.  Coast  Tauranga  - 

4,000 

Nga  ti  Raukawa 

Otaki  Manawatu  - - - 

1,000 

Nga  ti  Tuaratoa  - j 

Taupo,  Maniatipoto  Na  ti  Hohera,  Na  ti  tu 
Rumakina,  Na  ti  Kurarua 

2,000 

Nga  ti  Kahungunu  - 

E.  Coast  Turanga  - 
Ahuriri  in  Hawke’s  Bay  - 

2,400 

Rangitani 

2,600 

Nga  Ngaitahu  - j 

Middle  Island,  Motu  eka  Otago,  Chatham 
Isles  - 

2,600 

Scattered  remains  of  tribes  overlooked  in 

this  list  - 

4,300 

Total  - 

65,000 

A list  of  New  Zealand  customs  resembling  those  alluded  to  in  Scripture  as 
being  common  to  Israel,  or  the  heathen  around  them,  for  conformity  with 
which  they  were  driven  from  their  inheritance  : — 

I.  Sacrifices  of  the  dead.  In  the  hahunga,  or  raising  of  the  bones  of 
tlie  dead,  the  natives  assembled  together,  and  having  scraped 
' and  painted  them  with  red  ochre,  they  placed  food  upon  them, 
and  danced  around  them  during  the  night,  by  the  light  of  fires, 
and  afterwards  ate  these  offerings  of  the  dead. — Ps.  cvi.  28. 


412 


CUSTOMS  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


II. 

III. 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 


VII. 

VIII. 


IX. 


X. 


XI. 

XII. 


XIII. 


XIV. 


XV. 


XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

xxx. 


Cutting  the  flesh  for  grief — Lev.  xix.  28  ; xxi.  5 ; Deut.  xiv.  1 ; 

Jer.  xvi.  6 ; xli.  5 : xlvii.  5 ; xlviii.  37. 

Sorcery , witchcraft. — Lev.  xix.  26  ; Deut.  xviii.  10,  11  ; 2 Kings 
xvii.  17  ; xxi.  6. 

Tattooing. — Lev.  xix.  28  ; Jer.  iv.  30. 

Crying  when  friends  meet. — Gen.  xxix.  11  ; xxxiii.  4 ; xlv.  14,  15  ; 
xlvi.  29. 

Eating  their  enemies , a figurative  term  in  Scripture,  but  evidently 
borrowed  from  ancient  custom. — Ps.  xiv.  4 ; xxvii.  2 ; Jer.  x. 
25  ; Micah  iii.  3 ; Zech.  xi.  9. 

Burning  the  dead. — Amos  vi.  10  ; 1 Sam.  xxxi.  12. 

Putting  meat  and  flesh  into  baskets. — Gen.  xl.  17  ; Ex.  xxix.  3 ; 
2 Kings  x.  7. 

The  bridegroom  paying  for  his  bride. — Gen.  xxviv.  12  ; Ex.  xxii. 

16  ; Deut.  xxii.  29  ; 1 Sam.  xviii.  25. 

Casting  lots. — Josh.  vii.  14,  16  ; 1 Sam.  x.  20,  21  : xiv.  41,  42  ; 
Prov.  xvi.  33  ; Acts  i.  26. 

Regulations  for  cleanliness. — Deut.  xxiii.  13  ; the  natives  formerly 
used  the  mere  for  a similar  purpose. 

Cutting  the  hair  for  grief  or  as  a sign  of  mourning. — Lev.  xxi.  5 ; 
Deut.  xiv.  1 ; Isaiah  xv.  2 ; xxii.  12  ; Jer.  xl.  5 ; xlvii.  37  ; 
Ezek.  vii.  18  ; xxvii.  31. 

Eating  of  blood. — Gen.  ix.  4 ; Lev.  iii.  17  ; vii.  26  ; xvii.  10,  14  ; 
xix.  26  ; Deut.  xii.  16  ; xv.  23  ; I Sam.  xiv.  32,  33  ; Ezek. 
xxxiii.  25  ; xliv.  7,  15  ; Acts  xv.  20,  29. 

Crying  for  the  dead. — Gen.  xxvii.  41  ; 1.  3,  4,  10  ; Num.  xx.  29  ; 

Deut.  xxxiv.  8 ; 2 Sam.  i.  12,  17  ; iii.  32 ; Acts  viii.  2. 

The  law  of  blood. — Gen.  ix.  6;  Ex.  xxi.  12  ; Lev.  xxiv.  17;  2 
Sam.  iii.  30 ; 1 Kings  ii.  32  ; Rev.  xiii.  10. 

Hair  used  in  sacrifice. — Ezek.  v.  I — 4. 

The  younger  brother  taking  the  elder  brother's  wife  after  his  death.- — 
Gen.  xxxviii.  8 ; Deut.  xxv.  5 ; Matt.  xxii.  24. 

The  nearest  relative , if  there  be  no  brother , as  in  the  case  of  Obed 
and  Ruth. — Ruth  iv.  10. 

The  elder  brother  taking  his  sister  as  his  birthright. — Gen.  xx.  12. 
The  touching  of  food. — Haggai  ii.  12. 

Men  dressing  in  female  clothing. — Deut.  xxii.  5. 

God  present  in  the  whirlwind. — 1 Kings  xix.  11  ; Job  xxxviii.  1 ; 
Ezek.  i.  4 ; Nahum  i.  3. 

Wives  of  a king  the  property  of  his  successor. — 2 Sam.  xvi.  22  ; 1 
Wives  bought , — Gen.  xxix.  18  ; 2 Sam.  iii.  14. 

Ventriloquism , the  Witch  of  Endor. — 1 Sam.  xxviii.  7. 

Women  unclean  after  childbirth. — Lev.  xii.  2,  5 ; Luke  ii.  22. 

All  unclean  who  have  touched  a corpse. — Haggai.  ii.  13. 

Taumau , the  custom  of  betrothing  from  earliest  years. — Mat.  i.  18; 
Luke  i.  27. 

First-fruits  offered. — Ex.  xxii.  29  ; xxii.  16,  19  ; Proverbs  iii.  9. 
The  scapegoat. — Lev.  xvi.  10.  The  natives  let  the  first  fish  go 


CUSTOMS  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


413 


XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 

XL. 


which  they  caught  to  bring  back  others.  See  also  custom  of 
expiation  at  Patea. 

Bulrush  vessels.  Moki’s. — Isa.  xviii.  2. 

Prostituting  daughters. — Lev.  xix.  29. 

The  ancient  cubit  same  measure  as  that  of  New  Zealand,  from  the 
end  of  the  middle  finger  to  the  elbow. 

Males  only  permitted  to  eat  sacred  food. — Lev.  vi.  29. 

Worshipping  in  groves. — Ezek.  xx.  28;  xxxiii.25  ; Lev.  xvii.  10,  I T. 

Those  who  go  to  war  are  tapu. — Deut.  xviii.  9. 

Marrying  in  their  own  tribes . 

No  marriage  service. 

Sacred  trees. 

Serpent  worship.  In  New  Zealand,  where  there  are  no  serpents, 
eels  and  lizards  are  venerated  instead. 


HE  PAREARE,  OR  SNOW  SHOE. 


A FOREST  ENCAMPMENT. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 

In  October  1866  I accompanied  Sir  George  Grey  to  the 
Nga-ti-rua-nui  District ; when  we  reached  the  redoubt  on 
the  Waingongora  River,  where,  in  1843,  I discovered  the 
largest  deposit  of  moa  bones  which  has  been  found  in  the 
island^  the  Governor  asked  me,  as  soon  as  our  tents  were 
pitched,  to  shew  him  the  place  ; the  spot  was  almost 
close  at  hand  ; between  the  cliff  on  which  the  redoubt 
stands;  and  the  Waingongora  River,  there  is  a sandy 
plain  or  valley  of  a concave  form,  gradually  rising  up  the 
opposite  side,  to  the  old  site  of  the  Rangatapu  pa  ; on 
the  south  side  of  this  plain  there  is  a semi-circular  bank. 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


415 


along  tlie  whole  length  of  which  there  were  several  lines  of 
old  ovens,,  covered  over  with  sand,  but  indicated  by  frag- 
ments of  bones  still  laid  on  the  surface ; in  various  places 
along  this  bank  we  found  large  quantities  of  them,  many 
of  which  were  of  considerable  size  and  quite  perfect  ; 
these  were  taken  for  those  of  cattle,  and  thus  had  been 
left  undisturbed,  the  officers  of  the  redoubt  who  accom- 
panied us  were  not  a little  surprised  when  acquainted 
with  their  mistake  : in  a few  minutes  we  collected  a large 
heap  of  them ; several  soldiers  volunteered  their  services, 
and  dug  down  in  the  sand,  where  they  soon  came  to  the 
old  ovens  ; the  scene  was  quite  an  animated  one — all, 
including  His  Excellency  himself,  being  eagerly  engaged 
in  the  search.  The  opening  out  of  those  ancient  ovens, 
and  the  heaps  of  refuse  on  their  sides,  was  in  fact  the 
recovering  a page  from  the  ancient  history  of  the  Maori 
race ; it  presented  a picture  of  their  way  of  living,  and  gave 
convincing  proof  that  when  those  ovens  had  been  heated, 
the  island  was  stocked  with  the  various  kinds  of  wingless 
birds,  whose  huge  bones  excited  our  wonder  and  aston- 
ishment ; they  had  evidently  been  used  for  a very  long 
period,  from  the  different  strata  of  ashes  which  were  found 
underlying  one  another,  and  only  separated  by  an  inch  or 
two  of  sand ; this  seemed  to  imply  that  sometimes  a con- 
siderable period  intervened  between  the  different  hunts. 
These  numerous  fire-places  also  indicated  the  assemblage 
of  large  bodies  of  men ; probably  a moa  battue  required 
the  co-operation  of  all  the  surrounding  tribes ; whilst,  at 
other  times,  a portion  of  these  cooking  places  only  were 
used  by  those  residing  there,  who,  unable  to  obtain  the 
nobler  game,  were  glad  to  take  whatever  else  was  to  be 
had.  The  remains  of  almost  every  bird  and  fish  found  in 
the  island  were  there  met  with : the  skull  of  a seal,  and 
the  charred  fragments  of  human  bone,  clearly  revealed  the 
character  of  their  repasts,  and  from  the  broken  egg  shells 
of  the  moa  also  found  there,  it  was  evident  that  the  eggs  of 
those  birds  were  carefully  sought  for.  In  our  first  exploration 
a large  collection  of  a very  miscellaneous  character  was  made. 


416 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


comprising  not  only  bones  of  the  various  kinds  of  birds 
and  fisk,  but  also  what  were  supposed  to  be  rudely-formed 
knives  of  chert,  chipped  so  as  to  form  a sharp  edge,  also 
pieces  of  obsidian ; and  on  another  occasion,  the  Governor 
met  with  several  well-made  and  polished  stone  axes,  and 
even  the  toys  of  children,  such  as  tops  formed  of  pumice- 
stone,  as  well  as  carved  bone  handles  of  hatchets. 

Brunner  and  Heaphy,  in  a journey  of  exploration  along 
the  western  coast  of  the  Middle  Island  in  1 846,  speaking  of 
the  way  the  natives  there  managed  to  cut  the  greenstone, 
said,  Amongst  the  primitive  rocks  of  the  Middle  Island, 
stones  are  not  wanting  of  sufficient  hardness  to  cut  even  the 
pounamu,  and  the  Arahura  natives  lay  in  a large  stock  of 
thin  pieces  of  a sharp  quartose  slate,  with  the  edge  of  which, 
worked  saw  fashion,  and  with  plenty  of  water,  they  contrive 
to  cut  a furrow  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other,  until 
the  piece  may  be  broken  at  the  thin  place.”  What  more 
probable  than  that  this  affords  a solution  of  the  question 
about  chert  knives ; the  working  of  greenstone  would  be 
their  amusement  while  seated  round  their  fires,  and  thus 
the  stones  when  worn  out  would  be  left  in  the  spot  where 
they  had  been  used. 

Whilst  the  Danish  middens  and  Abbeville  gravel  pits 
are  exciting  such  interest,  and  giving  rise  to  so  many  con- 
jectures as  to  the  antiquity  of  our  race,  a few  remarks  may 
be  offered  on  the  probable  age  of  those  remains. 

The  stone  knives  of  the  Maori  so  closely  resembled  those 
of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Denmark,  that  a casual 
observer  might  be  led  to  the  conclusion  that  both  belonged 
to  the  same  period  and  people.  It  was  certainly  equally 
the  stone  age  with  both,  but  one  thing  seems  singular  in 
each  case ; if  the  skill  of  the  age  each  belonged  to  could 
not  contrive  an  implement  more  advanced  or  better  finished 
off  than  those  rude  stone  knives,  one  would  suppose  that 
they  would  have  been  too  much  prized  to  have  been 
abandoned  and  thrown  out  on  the  midden  in  such  numbers. 
The  very  fact  of  their  having  been  thus  cast  away,  seems  to 
prove  that  they  had  not  much  value  attached  to  them,  and 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


417 


were  merely  extemporized  for  the  occasion,  to  save  better 
and  more  highly-prized  implements.  From  the  polished 
fragments  of  stone  axes  found  along  side  of  those  rude  chert 
knives,  this  was  evidently  the  case  with  the  Maori;  and 
what  can  be  more  probable,  than  that  the  ancient  Danes 
merely  used  theirs  to  save  their  more  highly-prized  bronze 
and  iron  ones,  and  thus  threw  them  away  as  worthless, 
when  they  had  done  with  them  ; perhaps  they  were  only 
used  by  those  who  prepared  the  food,  and  were  never  in  the 
hands  of  the  chief  at  all. 

It  is,  therefore,  highly  probable,  whatever  may  be  the  age 
of  our  Maori  middens,  that  the  natives  were  then  quite  as 
advanced  as  they  were  when  the  European  first  landed  on 
their  shores.  These  ovens  were  evidently  contemporaneous 
with  the  moa,  and  when  they  were  first  used,  that  wonderful 
bird  was  then  abundant,  and  perhaps  the  last  remaining 
representatives  of  those  struthious  giants  in  the  whole  is- 
land were  cooked  in  them.  The  perfect  state  of  their 
remains,  forbids  our  assigning  them  an  antiquity  of  more 
than  two  centuries,  and  very  probably  not  even  the  half  of 
that.  Maori  songs  of  hunting  the  moa  are  still  to  be  met 
with,  as  well  as  proverbs  relating  to  them,  and  even  the 
manner  of  hunting  them  is  preserved.  The  natives  state  that 
when  a battue  was  to  take  place,  notice  was  given  to  all  the 
surrounding  villages,  whose  inhabitants  united  in  forming 
a cordon,  and  surrounding  the  birds,  drove  them  forward, 
gradually  contracting  the  circle  as  they  brought  them  to  the 
edge  of  some  lake,  then  rushing  forward  with  horrid  cries, 
compelled  the  frightened  birds  to  take  the  water,  where 
they  were  easily  killed,  as  there  they  could  not  use  their  legs 
in  their  defence. 

Another  method  of  hunting  them  was,  to  set  fire  to  the 
thickets  of  Koromiko  or  Veronica,  where  they  resorted, 
either  to  feed  on  the  leaves  of  that  shrub,  or  for  concealment ; 
and  to  this  effect  is  the  old  proverb — “ Ko  te  Koromiko 
te  rakau  i tunu  ai  te  moa:”  “ the  veronica  is  the  tree  that 
roasted  the  moa.”  Both  these  methods  must  have  been 
highly  destructive  to  the  race ; when  large  bodies  of  men 


418 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


thus  assembled,  the  poor  birds  would  perish  in  a wholesale 
way  : an  entire  flock  at  a time  would  be  required  to  form 
a sufficient  feast  for  such  a multitude.  The  size,  too,  of 
their  eggs  being  so  great,  their  haunts  well  known,  and  of 
necessity  contracted  in  extent,  they  would  have  little  chance 
of  rearing  their  offspring,  as  the  abundant  fragments  of 
shells  clearly  prove.  Another  cause  of  their  extinction  is  to 
be  traced  to  the  failure  of  their  peculiar  food.  In  Australia 
the  bustard,  or  wild  turkey,  chiefly  feeds  upon  reptiles,  the 
lizard  and  snake ; the  ostrich  also  does  the  same  in  Africa. 
In  former  days,  the  lizard  was  most  abundant  in  New  Zea- 
land, and  of  a much  larger  size  than  it  is  now  found  ; the 
firing  of  the  country  both  in  hunting  and  cultivating  the 
ground  must  have  greatly  diminished  the  number  of  the 
larger  kinds,  which  are  the  most  sluggish,  and  since  the 
arrival  of  the  cat  they  have  almost  become  exterminated. 
In  one  of  my  journeys  through  the  interior  my  natives 
killed  a tom  cat,  which,  although  almost  a skeleton,  had 
an  immense  stomach,  this  excited  my  curiosity,  I had  it 
opened,  when,  to  my  astonishment,  three  dozen  lizards 
were  taken  out,  most  of  them  had  been  swallowed  whole, 
and  were  scarcely  injured ; a clear  proof  of  the  rapid  de- 
vastation the  cat,  which  is  now  naturalized  in  the  New 
Zealand  forests,  is  making  amongst  those  reptiles,  as  well 
as  the  native  birds.  The  guana  or  tuatara , a lizard  eighteen 
inches  long,  once  so  abundant,  is  now  only  to  be  met  with 
on  some  of  the  small  isles,  and  thus  the  failure  of  their 
food  went  hand  in  hand  with  their  own  extinction.  But 
is  the  moa  quite  extinct  ? it  evidently  was  not  when  the 
European  first  arrived,  and  in  some  of  the  solitary  parts  of 
the  Middle  Island  there  is  clear  and  trustworthy  evidence  of 
its  footmarks  having  been  met  with,  and  even  of  its  having 
been  seen. 

In  the  year  1863,  some  men  were  prospecting  for  gold  in 
the  interior  of  the  west  coast  of  the  Province  of  Nelson, 
when  early  in  the  morning  one  of  them  reported  that  he 
suddenly  came  in  view  of  a gigantic  bird  standing  by  a 
stream  of  water ; alarmed,  he  ran  to  call  his  mates,  but  before 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


419 


they  arrived  the  bird  was  gone ; a gentleman  holding  an 
official  situation  under  the  Nelson  Provincial  Government, 
shortly  after  passed  that  way,  and  having  heard  the  report, 
questioned  the  man  very  closely  on  the  subject,  and  from  the 
accurate  description  given  of  the  bird,  he  was  quite  disposed 
to  believe  that  a living  moa  had  been  seen ; the  man  drew 
on  paper  the  outlines  of  one  pretty  accurately,  and  as  he 
had  only  recently  arrived  in  New  Zealand,  and  never  heard 
of  the  existence  of  such  a bird,  the  gentleman  in  question 
was  inclined  to  believe  the  statement.* 

Dr.  Hector  found  their  well-defined  tracks  through  the 
Manuka  scrub  on  the  mountain  ranges  of  the  Middle  Island 
still  remaining,  which  in  a climate  like  that  of  New  Zealand 
the  luxuriance  of  its  vegetation  would  soon  have  obliterated, 
if  those  paths  were  entirely  untrodden.  But  it  may  be  ob- 
jected, if  these  birds  are  still  in  existence,  how  is  it  they  are 
not  met  with  ? the  reply  is  easily  given : because  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  they  were  night  birds,  the  same  as 
the  apterix. 

The  name  of  the  plain  containiug  the  ovens  is  Bangatapu , 
it  may  refer  to  the  bank  where  the  middens  are  found  : the 
sacred  bank — or,  to  the  hunters  of  the  moa,  the  sacred  band, 
each  of  which  is  applicable  to  the  moa.  These  Maori  middens, 
therefore,  have  their  interest,  as  well  as  the  far  older  ones  of 
Europe,  they  are  as  worthy  of  our  consideration,  and  their 
investigation  is  as  calculated  to  throw  light  on  the  past  state 
of  the  Maori,  as  the  other  is  of  the  Scandinavian  race.  The 
entire  island  may  be  said  to  be  surrounded  by  them  ; not 
only  are  they  found  in  the  vicinity  of  every  old  pa,  but 
along  all  the  coasts  may  be  seen  vast  heaps  or  mounds  of 
shells,  remnants  of  olden  times,  when  the  entire  population 
had  periodically  during  the  scarce  season  to  visit  the  sea  side 
for  such  food  as  it  afforded ; amongst  the  shells,  mingled 
with  other  remains,  those  of  the  moa  are  generally  to  be 
found. 

In  the  Salisbury  Museum  a most  interesting  collection  of 
pre-historic  remains  is  to  be  seen,  which  is  perhaps  the 
* Mr.  Redhead. 


E E 2 


420 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


largest  in  England,  and  was  presented  by  Dr.  Blackmore, 
after  whom  it  is  called ; it  contains  many  stone,  bronze,  and 
iron  implements,  of  Danish,  French,  and  German,  as  well  as 
British  origin,  also  some  from  Asia,  with  others  from  Poly- 
nesia and  Australasia,  and  many  from  North  and  South 
America,  thus  affording  an  excellent  opportunity  of  compar- 
ing those  from  different  parts.  The  close  resemblance  which 
they  all  bear  to  each  other  is  very  striking,  and  leads  to  the 
conviction  that,  however  widely  separated  those  races  were 
in  locality,  age,  and  form  of  skull,  as  well  as  in  other  respects, 
still  in  mind  there  was  no  difference : hence  each  section  of 
the  human  family,  when  placed  in  similar  circumstances  and 
subjected  to  similar  wants,  was  led  to  supply  them  by  the 
same  means,  and  in  the  same  form  and  fashion  as  well ; in 
fact,  there  appears  positive  proof  in  that  noble  collection  of 
the  identity  and  unity  of  our  race,  and  of  the  truth  of  Holy 
Scripture  which  asserts  it.  The  Christian  has  cause  for 
thankfulness,  that  he  can  there  see  in  one  spot  such  sure  and 
convincing  proofs  brought  together,  that  the  foundation  of 
his  hopes  rests  on  a firm  and  enduring  rock,  which,  like  the 
pyramids,  can  resist  all  the  assaults  made  upon  it  through 
all  ages. 

In  that  museum  there  are  two  cases  of  imitations  which 
must  be  also  mentioned.  An  ingenious  fellow,  well  known 
by  the  soubriquet  of  Jack  Flint,  finding  the  demand  for 
pre-historic  articles  was  so  great,  thought  it  would  answer 
his  purpose  to  supply  it,  and  he  admirably  succeeded  in  so 
completely  imitating  them  that  many  were  deceived,  in  fact, 
it  was  extremely  difficult  to  discover  which  were  real  and 
which  false,  except  by  the  greater  freshness  of  the  imita- 
tion, thus  Jack  Flint  for  a time  carried  on  a lucrative 
manufacture.  This  seems  to  prove  how  easily  they  could 
have  been  extemporised  by  the  far  more  skilful  natives,  and 
that  they  most  likely  set  little  value  upon  them ; on  that 
account  it  is  highly  probable  they  would  long  be  used,  even 
after  they  had  obtained  bronze  and  iron,  which  would  for 
some  time  be  both  difficult  to  procure  and  only  in  small  quan- 
tities, as  all  the  three,  viz.,  stone,  bronze,  and  iron,  have 


MAOKI  MIDDENS. 


421 


been  found  together ; also  that  the  stone  implements  of  New 
Zealand  might  as  justly  be  termed  pre-historic  as  those  of 
Britain  or  Denmark,,  as  the  latter  were  made  when  history 
flourished  in  other  parts,  whether  in  Assyria  or  Egypt,  if  not 
as  late  as  in  Greece  or  Rome.  » 

In  addition  to  arrow-heads,  stone  axes,  &c.,  there  are  several 
fragments  of  ancient  Celtic  clothing  found  in  Germany ; the 
dose  resemblance  they  bear  to  those  of  New  Zealand  is  very 
striking,  in  fact  the  weaving,  if  it  can  be  called  such,  is  almost 
identical.  The  Indian  floor  matting  is  a near  approach  to  it ; 
the  fibres  of  flax  are  laid  in  parallel  lines,  and  joined  together 
at  a greater  or  less  distance  by  a seam ; there  were  fragments 
of  several  kinds,  some  much  finer  than  others,  resembling  the 
best  Maori  mats,  others  much  coarser,  like  the  common  ones. 


REMNANTS  OF  ANCIENT  CELTIC  CLOTHING. 


Those  fragments  of  ancient  clothing  were  found  amongst 
what  philologists  call  the  Indo-Germanic  races,  and  certainly 
they  have  such  an  Indian  character  about  them,  as  most 
closely  to  resemble  their  matting  of  the  present  day,  the 
form  and  manner  of  making  which,  the  off-sets  of  that  race, 
in  their  remote  migrations,  long  possessed,  when  almost 


422 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


every  other  trace  of  ancient  civilization  was  lost.  So  likewise 
the  Maori,  or  Indo-Australasian,  must  be  viewed  as  another 
off-set  from  the  same  stock,  still  preserving,  like  the  Celt, 
the  ancient  Hindu  way  of  manufacturing  their  mats,  as  well 
as  many  remnants  of  the  same  tongue  and  mythology. 
Hence  the  German  and  Maori  savages,  both  springing  from 
one  source,  seem  to  claim  a common  ancestry,  and,  if  not 
an  identity  of  origin,  at  any  rate  one  of  mind. 

A doubt,  however,  must  be  expressed,  whether  man  had 
anything  to  do  with  some  of  those  pre-historic  articles ; in 
Australia  some  specimens  were  obtained  of  small  fragments 
of  bone  two  or  three  inches  long,  evidently  belonging  to 
large-sized  animals.  The  donor  was  a gentleman  who  had 
a sheep  station  in  the  interior  : he  said,  if  memory  serves, 
on  the  New  England  plains  there  was  a regular  stratum 
of  such  bones  imbedded  in  a black  soil  at  a considerable 
depth,  that  they  were  all  similarly  fractured  with  sharp  edges 
and  of  nearly  the  same  size,  that  not  a single  entire  bone  had 
been  met  with  ; the  specimens  given  me  I transferred  to 
Professor  Owen. 

A natural  query  arises  : by  what  agency  were  they  thus 
broken  up  ? transported  in  such  quantities,  and  deposited  in 
that  black  mould  on  those  plains,  had  that  been  a grand 
native  manufactory  of  barbs  for  spears,  or  was  this  fracturing 
an  act  of  nature  ? all  had  sharp  edges,  showing  that  they 
had  been  brought  there,  without  any  of  the  grinding  effects 
which  would  have  occurred  if  subjected  to  the  violent  action 
of  water.  It  may  also  be  noticed  that  flints  are  easily  frac- 
tured by  a gentle  blow,  or  by  frost,  and  that  many  thus 
made  are  marvellously  like  pre-historic  remains.  All  the 
theories  about  the  stone  age  have  been  founded  on  the  sup- 
position of  its  marking  an  early  period  of  mankind,  a sort  of 
primaeval  epoch,  when  man  emerged  from  a still  lower  or 
bestial  state  to  a higher,  the  commencement  of  which  was 
marked  by  the  use  of  stone  implements.  But  this  evidently 
does  not  apply  to  the  Maori,  for  they  have  traditions  of  their 
arrival  in  New  Zealand,  and  have  preserved  both  the  names 
of  the  canoes  which  brought  them,  and  the  chiefs  who  came 


MAORI  MIDDENS. 


423 


in  them,  and  further,  of  their  forefathers  haying  had  horses 
and  iron  implements. 

In  addition  to  this,  the  great  similarity  of  the  Maori  tongue 
to  the  Sanscrit  evidently  marks  their  origin,  and  establishes 
the  fact  that  races  may  become  degraded,  and  have  re- 
course to  stone  implements  to  supply  the  place  of  copper 
or  iron,  which  from  changed  circumstances  were  no  longer 
to  be  procured,  and  indeed  it  seems  very  unlikely  that  any 
would  have  thought  of  stone  if  it  were  not  to  supply  the 
place  of  metal,  and  that  those  who  had  never  known  its  use 
would  have  had  recourse  to  stone.  If  man  had  ever  been 
of  simious  origin,  he  would  no  more  have  invented  the  one 
than  the  other,  but  continued  unchanged  to  this  day,  as  well 
as  the  other  members  of  that  family. 


AN  ANCIENT  EGYPTIAN,  AND  MODERN  MAORI  HOE,  HE  TIMA 


KERIKERI,  BAY  OF  ISLANDS. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


THE  AGE  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 

It  is  an  interesting  subject  of  enquiry  bow  far  those  grand 
convulsions,  which  have  left  such  indelible  marks  on  the 
earth's  surface  of  the  northern  hemisphere,,  may  be  traced  in 
the  southern,  and  whether  any  of  them  have  been  universal 
in  their  range. 

When  the  first  crust  was  formed  over  an  incandescent  orb, 
the  crystaline  or  unstratified  rocks  may  be  supposed  to  have 
been  homogenous,  and  one  simultaneous  process  to  have 
been  carried  on  throughout  the  world ; but  that  granitic 
pavement  being  laid,  every  subsequent  change  to  have  been 
more  or  less  local ; many  grand  convulsions  have  since 
occurred ; alterations  in  the  polarity  of  the  earth,  arising 
from  foreign  causes,  may  have  taken  place,  and  changed  the 
relative  position  of  sea  and  land  in  different  parts,  and  vast 
internal  powers  may  likewise  have  been  displayed,  upheaving 


THE  AGE  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


425 


one  region  and  depressing  another,  and  these  must  be  re- 
garded as  the  chief  agents  which  have  effected  all  the  later 
changes  of  our  planet ; but  those  convulsions,  however  great 
and  fearful,  appear  to  have  been  of  limited  range,  and  none 
of  them  universal  in  their  effects. 

Several  of  the  grand  deposits  of  the  northern  hemisphere 
seem  to  be  totally  wanting  in  the  southern.  In  New  Zealand 
it  is  doubtful  whether  the  lias  age  has  been  passed ; the 
secondary  sandstone  of  Australia  seems  to  be  only  now 
in  a state  of  deposition  there.  When  the  grand  mass  of 
the  southern  half  of  the  globe  was  submerged,  the  lands 
which  survived  that  great  cataclysm  and  remained  above  the 
sea  level,  seem  to  have  escaped  many  of  those  later  convul- 
sions which  have  since  occurred  in  other  parts  of  the  world, 
and  may  therefore  be  expected  to  present  the  peculiarities  of 
the  age  preceding  that  destruction,  and  still  preserve  the 
characteristic  features  of  its  fauna  and  sylva. 

The  lias  may  be  termed  the  bird  age  ; during  that  period 
birds  seem  to  have  been  the  chief  occupants  of  the  earth,  and 
to  have  attained  their  greatest  development  j the  foot-marks 
of  those  found  impressed  on  the  sandstone  of  Connecticut 
were  eighteen  inches  long,  with  a clearly-marked  stride  of 
six  feet,  indicating  a bird  thrice  as  large  as  the  ostrich. 

Remains  of  the  bird  age  are  still  to  be  seen  throughout 
the  southern  hemisphere,  every  part  of  which  has  its  living 
representative  of  the  struthious  family  or  some  other  ancient 
type  of  bird,  and  it  is  only  in  very  recent  times  that  several 
of  the  more  remarkable  forms  have  disappeared.  South 
America  has  the  rhea  or  nandus ; South  Africa  the  ostrich, 
which  has  there  its  chief  habitat,  and  is  conspicuous  both  for 
its  size  and  number ; Australia  has  the  emu,  and  the  East 
Indian  Isles  the  cassowary ; New  Guinea  the  rnuruk  ; whilst 
the  Mauritius  had  its  dodo,  and  Madagascar  its  JEpyornis 
maximus , whose  egg  is  said  to  have  equalled  half-a-dozen  of 
the  ostrich's,  being  fifteen  inches  long  by  nine  in  width ; even 
the  little  isles  of  Bourbon  and  Rodriquez  had  the  solitaire, 
which  probably,  with  the  dodo,  was  a gigantic  species  of 
pigeon.  Many  of  the  South  Sea  Isles,  so  limited  in  their 


426 


THE  AGE  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


extent,  still  possess  some  remnants  of  the  bird  age  : of  such 
is  the  tooth-billed  pigeon  (Didunculus  strigerostris) , the 
nearest  living  bird  allied  to  the  extinct  dodo,  it  is  found  in 
Upolo,  one  of  the  Navigator  Islands,  and  is  there  known 
as  the  manu  mea,  i.e.,  the  moa. 

But  it  is  in  New  Zealand  that  the  vestiges  of  the  bird  age 
abound.  The  remains  of  many  species  of  struthious  birds  are 
there  found,,  all  of  which  have  evidently  had  a very  recent 
existence,  some  of  their  remains  having  still  feathers  attached 
to  them,  indeed  it  is  by  no  means  sure  that  living  specimens 
are  not  yet  to  be  found  ; the  height  of  some,  and  the  massive 
forms  of  others,  must  have  been  remarkable.  The  moa, 
dinornis  giganteus,  in  size  and  height  almost  rivalled  the 
cameleopard,  and  probably  resembled  it  in  its  habits,  by 
feeding  on  the  tops  of  trees,  such  as  the  ti  dracena,  or  cab- 
bage palms.  The  dinornis  elephant  opus  was  perhaps  a still 
more  wonderful  bird,  which  from  its  massive  frame  more  nearly 
resembled  the  elephant,  and  thence  acquired  its  name. 

Ten  different  kinds  of  the  moa  or  dinornis  have  been 
named,  and  in  addition  to  them  may  be  added  the  palapterix 
ingens,  the  P.  geranoides,  and  the  aptornis  otidiformis. 
New  Zealand  still  possesses  at  least  four  living  species  of 
the  apterix,  and  in  addition  to  them  it  had,  and  most  pro- 
bably still  has,  the  notornis  mantelli,  a stuffed  specimen  of 
which  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.  Bones  of  all  these 
birds  have  been  found  in  the  greatest  abundance,  and  their 
charred  egg  shells  in  the  old  Maori  ovens  clearly  prove  they 
were  contemporaneous  with  man.  The  Maories  speak  of  the 
gigantic  moa  as  having  been  hunted  by  their  fathers,  and 
songs  of  their  exploits  with  it  are  still  preserved  ; a solitary 
feather  of  that  gigantic  bird,  the  last-prized  relic  possessed, 
was  said  to  have  been  buried  with  the  chief  Te  B-auparaha. 
The  bones  of  these  ancient  races  of  birds  are  still  abundant, 
and  the  recent  state  of  many  of  them  clearly  proves  that  they 
have  lived  within  the  last  half  century,  and  long  survived 
the  dodo. 

Amongst  the  lizards  of  New  Zealand  may  be  noticed  the 
tuatara  (Hatteria  Punctata) , which  Professor  Huxley  states 


THE  AGE  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


427 


is  more  nearly  allied  to  tlie  extinct  form  hyperodapedon, 
than  to  any  saurian  now  in  existence,  from  its  very  extra- 
ordinary internal  structure.  This  lizard,  which  is  seldom 
more  than  eighteen  inches  in  length,  takes  its  name  from 
the  teeth-like  ridge  on  its  back  ; it  was  formerly  very  abun- 
dant, but  is  now  nearly  extinct,  probably  it  was  once  preyed 
upon  by  the  moa,  and  when  it  was  less  numerous  became 
one  cause  of  its  decrease ; it  is  now  only  found  on  the  small 
islands  near  the  main  land,  which  are  uninhabited. 

The  bird  preceded  the  animal,  and  the  remarkable  absence 
of  all  land  animals  in  New  Zealand,  except  a diminutive  rat, 
presents  another  point  of  resemblance  to  the  liassic  age. 

From  the  general  presence  of  wingless  birds  on  every 
continent,  and  on  almost  every  lone  island  in  the  southern 
hemisphere,  there  is  strong  evidence  that  a grand  continent 
existed  in  the  bird  age,  from  the  destruction  of  which  New 
Zealand  escaped,  and  so  preserved  its  primitive  tenants ; 
but  the  disrupted  fragments  of  that  continent  being  widely 
severed  from  other  lands,  received  none  of  the  varied  races 
of  animals  which  later  epochs  called  into  existence  in  other 
parts  of  the  world. 

The  marsupial  races  still  surviving  in  Australia  seem  to 
point  to  a still  later  separation  of  that  insular  continent  from 
the  grand  regions  of  the  earth  : but  it  may  be  observed  that 
the  southern  half  of  the  globe  still  contains  the  largest 
organic  developments,  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  hippopo- 
tamus, and  the  sole  existing  species  of  the  tapir,  an  order  of 
which  Europe  has  only  the  pig  as  its  representative,  whilst 
in  the  southern  hemisphere  none  of  the  domesticated  animals 
of  the  other  half  seem  to  be,  properly  speaking,  indigenous ; 
it  is  there  likewise  the  reptile  and  saurian  attain  their  greatest 
dimensions;  indeed,  an  ancient  type  of  animal  form  seems  there 
to  prevail,  and  this  applies  to  the  sea  as  well  as  to  the  land. 
Many  kinds  of  fish  or  shells  being  either  identical,  or  more 
nearly  allied  to  those  of  the  carboniferous  than  of  the  present 
age ; in  particular  may  be  mentioned  the  placoids,  which 
form  the  first  order  of  fishes  in  the  arrangement  of  Agassiz ; 
they  are  characterised  by  having  their  skin  covered  irregu- 


428 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


larly  with  plates  of  enamel,  often  of  considerable  size,  some- 
times with  small  points  like  the  shagreen  on  the  skin  of 
sharks,  and  the  prickly  tooth-like  tubercles  on  that  of  rays  ; 
all  the  cartilagenous  fishes,  with  the  exception  of  the  stur- 
geon, belong  to  this  order,  which  includes  the  skates,  rays, 
dog  fish,  and  sharks. 

Fish  of  these  kinds  are  extremely  numerous  in  southern 
latitudes,  and  of  formidable  dimensions  ; the  Cestracion 
Philippi,  or  Port  Jackson  shark,  may  be  adduced  as  an 
example  ; of  this  fish  Hugh  Miller  says  : “ It  is  a creature, 
that  to  the  dorsal  spines  and  shagreen- covered  skin  of  the 
common  dog  fish,  adds  a mouth  terminal  at  the  snout,  not 
placed  beneath  as  in  most  other  sharks,  and  a palate  covered 
with  a dense  pavement  of  crushing  teeth,  which  better  illus- 
trates the  order,  as  it  first  appeared  in  creation,  than  any  of 
our  British  placoids.” 

The  Mako,  another  species  of  shark,  ranging  between  20° 
and  38°  south  latitude,  which  is  much  prized  by  the  Hew 
Zealanders  on  account  of  its  teeth — their  favorite  ear  orna- 
ments— seems  to  be  identical  with  one  whose  fossil  teeth  are 
so  abundant  in  the  Isle  of  Sheppey  and  other  parts  of  Britain. 

The  Garcharius  Megalodon , belonging  to  the  red  crag,  is 
found  in  Hew  Zealand,  in  a living  as  well  as  fossil  state. 
The  Tuatini,  a shark  of  genus  squatina  also  abounds,  it  has 
a large  head  like  that  of  the  tadpole,  with  its  mouth  like  the 
Cestracion  Philippi,  and  a body  tapering  to  the  tail ; it  is 
remarkable  for  the  form  of  its  teeth,  each  being  composed  of 
six  sharp  points,  like  so  many  separate  ones  fixed  in  the 
same  block,  and  inclining  outwards  as  a saw  from  the  centre 
of  the  mouth.  This  destructive  fish  is  often  twelve  feet  long, 
its  teeth  are  identical  with  those  found  in  the  London  clay. 

The  rays  also  are  remarkable  for  size,  some  having  been 
seen  in  Sydney  harbour  not  much  less  than  five  feet  across 
the  back  ; one  kind  is  armed  with  a long  tail,  bristling 
with  spines,  and  beneath  it  is  a sting  identical  with  the 
Pleurocanthus , figured  by  Hugh  Miller,  and  found  in  the 
coal  measures  of  Great  Britain,  which  he  justly  remarks 
must  have  been  used  as  a weapon  of  torture  as  well  as  of 


THE  AGE  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


429 


defence,,  instances  of  death  from  its  sting  not  being  uncom- 
mon ; the  peculiar  form  of  this  fish  adapts  it  for  shallow 
waters,  where  it  abounds,  the  natives  when  fording  them 
sometimes  touch  one  of  these  dangerous  fish,  which  imme- 
diately elevates  its  tail  and  strikes  the  offender  with  its  barb 
or  sting,  which  is  concealed  in  a case  beneath,  and  lubri- 
cated with  a poisonous  slimy  matter,  the  saw-like  sting 
causes  a jagged  wound,  extremely  difficult  to  heal,  which 
sometimes  proves  fatal.  The  Grastronemus  Rhombus  of  the 
Eocene,  beautiful  specimens  of  which  may  be  seen  in  the 
Liverpool  Museum  ; this  fish  is  distinguished  by  its  dorsal 
bi-forked  spine,  and  appears  to  be  identical  with  the  New 
Zealand  Pakirikiri. 

Many  of  the  shells  also  in  New  Zealand  closely  resemble 
the  fossil  ones  of  Britain,  this  applies  to  several  species  of 
the  Terebratula,  which  are  found  both  in  a living  and  fossil 
state  : such  is  also  the  case  with  the  annularia  australis , which 
is  found  in  the  London  clay ; the  Typhis  Pungens  of  the 
Eocene  is  also  there  a living  shell ; the  Lingula  anatina,  so 
named  from  its  resemblance  to  a duck^s  bill,  is  a singular 
shell,  being  the  only  known  bivalve  that  is  pedunculated, 
unless  the  terebratula  be  so  ; it  is  an  Australian  shell,  found 
in  Moreton  Bay,  and  also  in  the  Philippines,  Hugh  Miller 
not  unaptly  likened  it  to  a wooden  spade  with  a handle. 
The  Trigonia , a characteristic  shell  of  the  Oolite,  still  lives 
in  Sydney  harbour  and  other  parts  of  Australia.  The  volva- 
ria  Bulloides  of  the  Eocene,  is  also  a recent  shell  of  the 
southern  seas. 

The  cocks-comb  oyster,  which  is  found  both  upon  the 
rocks  and  in  mangrove  swamps  whose  range  in  the  southern 
hemisphere  reaches  to  37°  S.  lat.,  seems  to  be  coextensive 
with  the  mangrove,  for  where  it  terminates  there  also 
this  tree  oyster  (Dendrostrea,  S.  W.)  ends ; it  grows  not 
only  on  the  roots  of  that  semi-marine  tree,  but  likewise 
attaches  itself  to  the  lower  branches  which  touch  the  water 
when  the  tide  is  in  ; it  thus  forms  large  masses,  one  adhering 
to  another,  when  the  branch  decays  they  fall  into  the  mud, 
and  there  form  considerable  deposits.  Not  only  is  this  ostrea 


430 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


found  in  the  green  sand  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  but  also  in 
similar  clusters,  and  any  one  who  has  seen  it  in  its  natural 
habitat,  the  mangrove  swamp,  will  readily  identify  it  with  its 
fossil  ancestor. 

Many  others  might  be  mentioned,  but  these  are  sufficient 
to  show  that  organisms  belonging  to  remote  ages,  which 
have  long  been  extinct  in  one  hemisphere,  still  exist  in  the 
other,  and  that  those  grand  convulsions  which  caused  their 
destruction  in  one  part  of  the  globe  did  not  reach  the  other, 
or  if  they  did,  in  such  a modified  way  as  not  entirely  to 
destroy  the  characteristic  forms  of  that  period.  If  such  be  the 
correct  inference,  it  will  be  corroborated  by  the  flora  and  sylva 
of  those  countries  which  have  escaped  such  destructions ; 
they  will  present  a general  resemblance  to  the  vegetation 
of  the  earth  peculiar  to  the  period  which  preceded  such 
geological  changes,  and  this  likewise  will  be  found  to  be  the 
case.  Many  of  the  singular  forms  of  vegetable  life  belonging 
to  the  carboniferous  age  of  Britain,  but  no  longer  clothing 
its  surface,  still  survive  in  those  southern  lands. 

The  eartffis  earliest  garment  was  most  probably  that  of 
cryptogamous,  or  cellular  plants  : the  fern,  the  moss,  and 
the  lichen  preceded  the  nobler  forms  of  vegetable  life ; this, 
then,  may  be  justly  termed  the  fern  age  of  New  Zealand, 
since  nearly  nine-tenths  of  its  surface,  particularly  of  the 
northern  island  is,  or  rather  was  thus  covered,  and,  perhaps, 
no  other  country  possesses  such  a variety  of  species.  The 
fern  trees  of  New  Zealand  are  of  several  kinds,  and  so  abun- 
dant as  to  form  a striking  ffiature  of  its  landscape ; they  are 
found  in  every  part  of  those  islands  ; they  frequently  attain  a 
height  of  fifty  feet,  and  some  are  occasionally  found  branched; 
in  the  shale  and  sandstone  of  the  British  coal  measures  similar 
stems  of  fern  trees  are  met  with . The  vast  number  of  beautiful 
mosses,  Jungermania  hepatica,  lichens , and  especially  Lyco- 
podia, also  form  a distinguishing  feature  of  its  flora.  The 
largest  known  representative  of  the  gigantic  Lepidodendron 
is  the  Lycopodium  densum  of  New  Zealand,  which  attains  a 
height  of  fully  four  feet,  having  a stiff  woody  stem  half-an- 
inch  in  diameter,  and  so  tough  and  strong  that  formerly  the 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


431 


natives  converted  it  into  fish-hooks.  There  is  also  a general 
resemblance  between  the  aquatic  plants  of  those  islands  and 
the  fossil  ones  of  the  British  coal  measures ; of  the  catamites , 
and  especially  the  stigmaria,  to  the  roots  of  the  raupo,  tyjpha 
augustiflora,  these  often  attain  a length  of  several  feet,  and 
form  a tube  of  one  or  two  inches  in  diameter,  covered  by  a 
strong  silicious  skin,  with  rings  at  regular  distances,  and  a 
fringe  of  stiff  fibres,  with  a circular  dome-shaped  termina- 
tion. In  calcareous  waters,  these  roots  are  often  found  with 
their  forms  impressed  in  the  deposit,  closely  resembling  the 
fossil  stigmaria  and  calamites.  Stigmaria  Fycoides , figured 
in  “ Miller’s  Testimony  of  the  Rock,”  appears  to  be  only  the 
dried  up  foot  stalk  of  a palm  or  fern  tree,  to  both  of  which 
it  bears  a close  resemblance. 

The  next  most  ancient  covering  of  the  earth  was  composed 
of  monocotyledonous  plants,  with  their  parallel-veined  leaves ; 
they  are  endogenous  in  growth,  or  increase  from  within,  as 
the  palms,  lilies,  grasses,  &c.  The  simple  blade  of  grass 
may  be  regarded  as  the  type  of  a large  portion  of  the  New 
Zealand  plants,  as  well  as  those  of  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere ; the  lofty  bamboo  and  useful  sugar  cane  are  to  be 
classed  amongst  the  chief  representatives  of  this  order,  and 
are  but  gigantic  forms  of  grass  ; the  cane  is,  perhaps, 
one  of  the  earliest  types  of  the  tree  ; in  the  manner  of 
growth,  in  its  leaf  and  flower,  it  is  but  a grass ; its  shoots 
can  scarcely  be  termed  branches,  they  spring  both  from  the 
roots  and  joints,  the  same  as  in  a tuft  of  grass.  In  the  tro- 
pical Indian  isles  the  cane  has  its  chief  development,  and  it 
terminates  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  where  it  is  found 
in  size  little  exceeding  that  of  a strong  stalk  of  grass.  In 
the  coal  measures  of  Britain  various  fossil  forms  of  the  cane 
also  abound. 

The  Arica  Sajoida , or  Nikau  palm,  also  belongs  to  the 
same  age,  and  in  a singular  manner  agrees  with  those  found 
in  our  coal  fields,  by  being  also  marked  with  annual  rings. 
The  Gycas  and  Zamia,  which  are  likewise  British  fossils,  have 
now  their  living  representatives  only  in  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere ; the  true  palm  is  a branchless  tree ; the  Ti  dracena 


432 


THE  AGE  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


or  Gordyline  Strida,  remains  so  until  it  has  flowered;  its 
leaf,  like  that  of  the  young  palm,  is  a simple  blade  of  grass, 
and  its  top  is  but  a tuft  of  those  grassy  blades  produced  to  a 
large  size;  as  it  increases  the  first  leaves  fall,  and  then  a 
stem  is  gradually  formed,  which  continues  to  grow,  until  it 
attains  a height  of  nearly  twenty  feet,  when  a flower  stalk  is 
thrust  out  from  the  centre  of  the  shoot,  which  it  divides, 
and  thus  causes  a second  to  arise,  and  so  makes  another 
branch;  each  succeeding  year  multiplies  those  shoots,  and 
thus  in  process  of  time  it  becomes  full  of  branches,  and 
finally  attains  the  size  and  height  of  a large  timber  tree, 
thus  becoming  a gigantic  grass  tree  ; its  wood,  like  that 
of  the  palm,  is  composed  of  a mass  of  parallel  vascular 
fibres ; this  also,  like  the  cane,  seems  to  be  one  of  the 
earliest  type,  belonging  to  a very  numerous  family  in  New 
Zealand,  and  one  which  pervades  the  entire  range  of  the 
southern  hemisphere ; it  is  also  a connecting  link  between 
the  yucca  and  aloe,  and  appears  to  bear  a general  re- 
semblance to  the  Lepidodendron  and  Sigillaria.  The  same 
simple  form  is  seen  in  the  Australian  Xanthorrhoea , or 
grass  tree,  in  the  Harakeke  Phormimum  Tenax , in  the 
Kengarenga  Arthop  odium  cirrhatum,  the  Turutu  Dianella, 
and  in  many  kinds  of  Astelia,  which  are  either  epiphytes 
loading  the  trees  of  the  forest  with  their  weight,  or  semi- 
aquatic  plants  flourishing  in  swamps.  The  various  asters 
which  enliven  the  central  plains  with  their  daisy-shaped 
flowers,  and  the  extensive  family  of  Taramea  Acyphilla, 
with  their  dreadful  pointed  leaves,  known  by  the  name  of 
(C  Spaniards,”  producing  an  aromatic  rezin  much  prized 
by  the  natives;  the  climbing  Kie  Kie  Freycinetia  Banksii, 
the  Paupo  TypJia  augustifolio , the  Toetoe  Pukako  Lepido- 
sperrna  , elatio,  the  Toitoi  Arundo  Australis , which  ranges 
over  the  pampas  of  South  America,  as  well  as  the  plains  of 
New  Zealand  and  Australia;  the  Mata  Arundo  mata,  a reed 
bearing  a hard  red  grain.  To  these  also  must  be  added  the 
extensive  family  of  epacridious  plants,  with  their  carnation- 
shaped leaves,  of  which  the  Neinei  Dracophyllum  latifolium 
attains  the  size  of  a tree.  These  in  general  appear  to  be 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


433 


dispersed  throughout  the  southern  hemisphere,  and  bear  a 
strong  resemblance  to  those  of  the  carboniferous  age. 

In  addition  to  these  are  the  coniferous  trees,  which  also 
present  a striking  likeness  to  those  found  in  the  coal  mea- 
sures, their  leaves  having  a primitive  type  in  being  parallel 
veined.  The  Dammara  are  now  only  found  in  a line  extending 
from  Borneo  to  New  Zealand  j about  six  kinds  are  known, 
including  the  Damara  Orientcilis , or  pitch  pine  of  Amboyna, 
and  the  Damara  Australis , or  Kauri,  which  furnishes  the 
finest  spars  for  our  navy ; both  of  these  pines  are  worthy  of 
notice  on  account  of  the  immense  quantity  of  valuable  resin 
they  produce,  some  lumps  of  Kauri  gum,  as  it  is  called,  have 
been  found,  more  than  a hundred  pounds  in  weight.  The 
various  semi-fossil  kinds  of  resin  met  with  in  the  southern 
lands  are  all  extremely  interesting,  as  the  gum  copal  in 
South  Africa,  in  the  Philippines  and  Indian  Isles,  and  two 
kinds  in  New  Zealand,  which  in  hardness  and  beauty  exceed 
that  of  the  Kauri,  more  closely  resembling  amber,  which  may 
be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  carboniferous  epoch  of 
Europe.* 

The  locality  of  the  Damara  is  generally  in  deep  valleys 
with  a pipe  clay  soil,  which  renders  the  ground  retentive  of 
moisture,  and  therefore  always  humid  ; the  quantity  of  matter 
formed  round  the  stem  of  a Kauri  by  the  annual  shedding  of 
its  leaves  and  bark  is  so  great,  as  frequently  to  become  a 
mound  six  or  eight  feet  high,  which  makes  the  tree  appear  to 
rise  from  the  apex  of  a pyramid,  thus  showing  how  materially 
such  debris  have  aided  in  forming  the  vegetable  deposits  of 
the  coal  age ; the  Kauri  resin  is  found  throughout  the  range 
of  the  New  Zealand  coal  fields,  in  the  Waikato  coal  it  is  seen 
in  small  nodules,  highly  colored  and  transparent,  but  in  that 
of  Massacre  Bay,  in  large  lumps,  chiefly  opaque  and  filled 
with  iron  pyrites. 

The  net- work  character  of  the  roots  of  New  Zealand  trees, 
which  run  along  the  ground  and  do  not  penetrate  any  depth, 
seldom  having  tap  roots,  is  also  a point  of  resemblance  to  the 
most  ancient  forests. 

* These  specimens  I have  picked  up  on  the  New  Zealand  shores 


434 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


The  noble  Araucaria,  which  figures  in  our  coal  measures, 
and  was  doubtless  then  the  monarch  of  that  primseval  forest, 
is  now  confined  to  the  southern  hemisphere  ; the  nunjber 
of  species  belonging  to  this  beautiful  coniferous  family  is 
very  limited ; two  only  have  been  found  in  South  America, 
one  being  in  the  Brazils,  A.  Braziliensis,  and  the  other  in 
Chili  on  the  opposite  side,  A.  Imbricata ; two  in  Australia, 
A.  Cunninghamii , commonly  known  as  the  Moreton  Bay 
pine,  and  A.  Bidwellii , or  the  Bunyabunya,  whose  large 
seeds  form  a portion  of  the  sustenance  of  the  natives;  and 
one  in  Norfolk  Island,  A.  Bxcelsa.  New  Caledonia  and 
other  Indian  isles  probably  possess  varieties  of  this  beautiful 
conifer,  but  at  present  these  are  nearly  all  which  are  known. 
Alluding  to  this  tree,  Hugh  Miller  says  : — “ Though 
marked  by  certain  peculiarities  of  structure,  they  bore,  as  is 
shown  by  the  fossil  trunks  of  Granton  and  Craigleith,  the 
familiar  outlines  of  true  coniferous  trees,  and  would  mayhap 
have  differed  no  more  in  appearance  from  their  successors  of 
the  same  order  that  now  live  in  our  forests,  than  these  differ 
from  the  conifers  of  New  Zealand  or  New  South  Wales.” 

Mudie,  in  his  sketch  of  this  order  of  trees,  makes  the  fol- 
lowing pertinent  remarks  on  the  Araucaria  : — “ They  are  all 
local  trees,  and  with  the  exception  of  the  first  species,  A. 
Imbricata,  they  are  all  confined  within  a small  compass,  and 
not  far  from  the  same  parallel,  that  is,  about  23°  or  24°  south 
latitude.  Though  no  conclusion  has  been  hitherto  drawn 
from  it,  it  is  a curious  fact  that  there  should  be  a well-defined 
and  rather  singular  genus  of  plants  ranged  round  the  parallel 
of  nearly  the  southern  tropic,  and  at  wide  distances  from 
each  other,  whilst  not  one  of  these  bears  much  resemblance 
to  any  other  vegetable  of  the  district  in  which  it  is  found.” 
These  remarks  will  also  apply  in-  some  measure  to  the  damara, 
but  when  these  singular  trees  are  viewed  as  belonging  to  an 
ancient  type  which  existed  in  the  carboniferous  age  of  Britain, 
they  then  bear  strong  testimony  in  support  of  the  theory  here 
advanced. 

There  are  many  plants  and  trees  which  are  widely  spread 
throughout  the  southern  hemisphere  ; of,  such  is  the  Gasua- 


THE  AGE  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


435 


rina,  which  is  found  in  many  of  the  Polynesian  isles,  as  well 
as  in  Australia  its  chief  abode.  The  Casuarina,  with  its 
peculiar  jointed  leaves,  may  be  regarded  as  a gigantic  form 
of  the  Equisetum  of  Britain.  The  various  kinds  of  Proteacese, 
more  generally  known  as  the  Banksia  of  Australia,  with  their 
strange  parallel- veined  leaves,  the  lines  horizontally  placed, 
are  also  deeply  interesting,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Hakea, 
Dryandria  and  many  others  which  are  seen  in  the  European 


BANKSIA  SOLONIS,  EXTINCT.  BANKSIA  SERATA,  EXISTING. 


Eocene  formation.  The  Fuchsia  excorticata  and  JBetula  Tawai, 
which  are  common  to  Tierra  del  Fuego,  as  well  as  to  New 
Zealand.  The  Veronicas,  so  numerous  in  the  latter  islands, 
are  also  found  in  many  of  the  tropical  ones  to  the  north,  on 
the  tops  of  mountains,  where  they  obtain  a similar  climate, 
they  are  even  met  with  in  the  Falklands.  The  Ti  JDracena 
and  many  others  are  equally  widely  dispersed,  which  can 
only  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  them  to  be  relics  of 
a continental  flora  still  existing  on  the  fragmentary  parts 


p p 2 


436 


THE  AGE  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


which,  have  survived  the  destruction.  To  this  effect  are  the 
remarks  of  Dr.  Hooker  : — 

“ Enough  is  here  given  to  show  that  many  of  the  peculi- 
arities of  each  of  the  three  grand  areas  of  land  in  the  southern 
latitutes  are  representative  ones,  affecting  a botanical  rela- 
tionship as  strong  as  that  which  prevails  throughout  the 
lands  within  arctic  and  north  temperate  zones,  and  which  is 
not  to  be  accounted  for  by  any  theory  of  transport  or  variation, 
but  which  is  agreeable  to  the  hypothesis  of  all  being  members 
of  a once  more  extensive  flora,  which  has  been  broken  up  by 
geological  and  climatic  causes.” 

The  striking  resemblance  which  the  New  Zealand  flora 
bears  to  that  of  the  carboniferous  age  of  Europe,  suggests 
also  the  probability  of  that  flora  having  once  been  in  a great 
measure  coextensive  with  the  earth's  surface,  and  that  simi- 
lar climates  then  possessed  a similar  form  of  vegetation, 
which  each  convulsion  destroyed  or  infringed  upon  to  the 
extent  of  its  range,  and  gave  birth  to  altered  forms  of  vege- 
table and  animal  existence. 

Dr.  Unger,  of  Vienna,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  and 
cautious  of  leading  botanical  paleontologists,  to  account  for 
the  similarity,  not  to  say  identity  of  vegetable  forms  existing 
in  the  Eocene  beds  of  Europe  and  the  present  flora  of  Aus- 
tralia, says  : — 

“ New  Holland  and  the  neighbouring  isles  have  a vegeta- 
tion not  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  Several 
natural  orders  and  genera  are  there  found  in  overwhelming 
abundance,  for  instance,  certain  myrtaceous  plants,  euca- 
lypti, epacrids,  proteaceoe,  santaleoe,  monimeacoe,  and  au- 
thobolece,  mimosa,  araucaria,  podocarpus,  and  partly  callitris. 
In  the  European  Eocene  formation  not  only  is  found  the 
polymorphous  order  myrtaceae,  the  genus  eucalyptus  itself 
is  represented  amongst  the  fossils,  also  the  epacrids,  prote- 
aceoe, dryandra,  hakea,  embothrium,  grevillea,  lomatia,  per- 
sonia,  petrophyllum.  Of  the  genus  Leptomeria,  several 
species  found  in  the  Tyrol  and  lignite  deposits  of  the  Rhine. 
Nor  must  we  omit  the  genus  Laurella,  peculiar  to  New  Zea- 
land and  Chili,  all  these  fragments  make^it  evident  that  the 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


437 


flora  of  the  Eocene  period  bore  the  character  of  the  present 
Australian.  Amongst  the  common  fossils  of  Sotzka  and 
Haring  are  the  branches  of  a coniferous  plant,  which  has 
its  exact  counterpart  in  the  genus  Araucaria,  exclusively 
belonging  to  the  southern  hemisphere ; New  Holland  and 
Norfolk  Island  possessing  five  species.  Amongst  the  fossil 


FOSSIL  FERN,  DUDLEY. 


oaks  of  the  Eocene  is  one  with  the  type  peculiar  to  the 
Javanese  ones  of  the  present  day,  and  the  dwarf  beeches  of 
Tierra  del  Euego,  Chili,  Tasmania  and  New  Zealand  are  also 
found  in  the  Eocene. 

“ Hence  at  the  Eocene  period  Europe  must  have  had  a 
climate  like  that  of  New  Holland  at  the  present  day,  and 
their  lands  must  have  been  connected. 

“We  know  that  every  species  was  originally  confined  to 
a more  or  less  circumscribed  space,  whence  it  spread  cen- 
trifugally;  at  present  a considerable  number  of  European 
plants  grow  in  New  Holland ; to  explain  this  indentity  of 
species  in  the  Polynesian  Isles  and  Australia  we  must  assume 
a continental  connection. 


438 


THE  AGE  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


ct  Australia,  on  acccount  of  its  isolated  geographical  posi- 
tion, strange  productions,  curious  physical  character,  and 
the  low  degree  of  development  attained  by  its  flora  and 
fauna  must  not  be  regarded  as  a newly-born  island,  but  on 
the  contrary,  as  a country  in  its  senility,  which  from  time 
immemorial  had  retained  its  character  unchanged.  New 
Holland  may  be  likened  to  an  old  man  rather  than  to  a child ; 
none  of  the  newer  formations  cover  its  primitive  rocks, 
and  its  older  deposits,  principally  consisting  of  layers  of 
carboniferous  sandstone  and  porphyry,  are  horizontal  and 
undisturbed.” 

This  writer,  though  differing  in  the  conclusions  he  arrives 
at  from  those  here  expressed,  still  adduces  facts  which  fully 
establish  the  views  taken ; there  is  nothing  stated  which 
can  prove  that  every  species  was  originally  confined  to  a 
more  or  less  circumscribed  space,  but  everything  to  bear  out 
the  idea  of  distinct  creations,  and  that  the  flora  of  the  Eocene 
pervaded  the  whole  earth,  since  allied  and  closely  resembling 
species  once  simultaneously  existed  in  both  hemispheres, 
and  using  that  writers  similitude  of  an  old  man  in  extreme 
senility,  to  express  the  productions  of  Australia  and  New 
Zealand,  and  a child  to  represent  those  of  Europe,  it  is  far 
more  likely  that  wherever  there  is  an  identity  of  species  that 
it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a remnant  of  the  older  flora  rather 
than  a gift  from  the  more  recent  one. 

These  remarks  will  therefore  apply  to  South  Africa,  and 
other  lands  of  the  southern  hemisphere  as  well  as  to  Austra- 
lia and  New  Zealand,  in  all  which,  wherever  investigation 
has  been  carried,  similar  peculiarities  of  flora  and  fauna 
have  been  noticed. 

The  primitive  character  of  the  New  Zealand  flora  is  like- 
wise very  striking  from  the  low  degree  of  development  or 
rudimentary  appearance  of  many  of  its  plants  and  flowers, 
so  much  so,  that  the  observer  can  scarcely  fail  to  regard 
them  as  embryo  forms,  to  be  perfected  at  some  future 
period;  thus  there  is  the  miniature  representative  of  the 
dandelion,  with  its  peculiar  leaf  and  flower ; of  the  butter- 
cup, with  every  flower  varying  in  the  number  of  its  petals. 


THE  AGE  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


439 


from  one  up  to  nine,  the  diminutive  daisy,  the  harebell,  wil- 
low plant,  speedwell,  persecaria,  the  scentless  violet,  St. 
John’s  wort,  and  many  other  familiar  flowers  which  are 
at  once  recognised  as  the  original  types  of  their  more  perfect 
descendants  on  the  other  side  of  the  world. 

So  likewise  with  the  fruits  of  New  Zealand,  if  there  are  no 
stone  pears,  or  plums,  as  in  Australia,  in  their  place  appear 
the  outward  forms,  covered  with  a purple  bloom  as  of  a 
luscious  fruit  of  most  inviting  appearance,  but  in  reality 
being  only  a painted  stone  or  bitter  kernel. 

In  the  New  Zealand  swamps  may  be  seen  a cyperaceous 
plant,  which  the  natives  call  Pureirei , it  is  often  found  with 
a stem  of  nearly  five  feet,  composed  of  a number  of  grassy 
stalks,  cemented  together  in  one  mass,  apparently  by  a 
resinous  exudation,  thus  giving  it  a tree-like  character ; this 
may  be  regarded  as  the  simplest  form  of  a rudimentary  tree 
which  seems  to  precede  the  Xanthorea  hastilis,  or  Australian 
grass  tree,  which  also  belongs  to  the  same  natural  order  as 
the  other,  but  differs  from  it  by  having  the  mass  of  stalks  or 
fibres  which  compose  the  stem  covered  with  a kind  of  bark, 
defended  by  a coating  of  gum,  thus  approaching  one  step 
nearer  to  the  perfect  tree,  still  it  is  branchless,  but  this 
deficiency  also  applies  to  all  the  members  of  the  palm  family ; 
whilst  the  Ti  dracena  and  cordyline  stricta  advance  still  fur- 
ther and  are  branched,  and  attain  the  size  of  timber  trees, 
though  still  retaining  the  rudimentary  character  of  the 
former.  Indeed,  some  plants  of  this  order  have  attained 
a size  and  age  which  have  rendered  them  conspicuous 
amongst  all  the  productions  of  the  vegetable  kingdom;  of 
such  was  the  Dragon  tree  of  Orotawa. 

These  are  all  to  be  regarded  as  indications  of  an  Ancient 
and  primitive  flora,  to  this  effect,  Dr.  Hooker,  speaking  of 
the  Australian  flora,  says  : — “ That  its  origin  is  referable 
to  another  period  of  the  world’s  history,  from  that  which 
contemporaneously  peopled  the  rest  of  the  globe  with  its 
existing  vegetation.” 

It  has  been  a general  idea  that  Australia  and  New  Zea- 
land are  of  very  recent  formation,  that,  in  fact,  the  same 


440 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


process  lias  been  going  on  in  them  which  is  still  to  be  seen 
in  many  of  the  South  Sea  islands,  whose  barren  surface, 
when  raised  above  the  ocean,  gradually  becomes  clothed 
with  vegetation,  through  the  agency  of  birds,  the  drifting  of 
the  waves,  and  the  aid  of  winds,  but  this  will  not  account  for 
the  peculiarities  of  those  countries,  which  possess  a flora  and 
a fauna  dissimilar  to  any  other  now  existing,  remarkable  for 
their  wingless*  birds,  marsupial  animals,  and  those  unique 
specimens  of  animal  life,  the  echidna  and  ornithorinchus 
paradoxus. 

These  singularities,  in  a great  measure,  apply  to  the  many 
lone  islands  which  dot  those  southern  seas.  Norfolk  Island, 
with  its  peculiar  sylva  and  its  noble  araucaria,  which  is  only 
found  within  its  contracted  limits,  and  that  of  Philip  Island  ad- 
jacent to  it,  which  is  remarkable  for  possessing  a parrot  closely 
allied  to  the  kakapo,  the  owl  parrot  of  New  Zealand.  The 
little  Isle  of  Pines,  still  covered  with  a conifer  peculiar  to  it. 
Araucaria  Cookii,  which  from  its  height  becomes  a regular 
land-mark.  The  lone  Isle  of  Amsterdam,  which  is  but  a 
mere  rock  rising  up  from  the  depths  of  the  ocean,  has  still 
its  grove  of  pines  upon  it ; and  the  equally  solitary  Isle  of 
Tristan  D’acunah  possesses  a large  rail,  which,  singular  to 
say,  does  not  inhabit  the  whole  of  the  isle,  but  confines  itself 
to  the  precincts  of  a marsh  on  one  side  of  it.  Lord  Howe's 
Island,  the  Auckland  Isles,  the  Chatham  and  others,  might 
also  be  noticed  as  containing  allied  portions  of  the  flora  and 
fauna  of  New  Zealand,  although  so  widely  separated  from  it, 
thus  contributing  their  united  testimony  to  their  having  all 
been  anciently  parts  of  one  and  the  same  continent. 

Dr.  Sclater’s  deductions  on  Madagascar  and  the  Mascarene 
Islands*  corroborate  the  views  here  taken,  that  the  anomalies 
of  their  mammal  fauna  can  best  be  explained  by  supposing 
that,  anterior  to  the  existence  of  Africa  in  its  present  shape, 
a large  continent  occupied  parts  of  the  Atlantic  and  Indian 
Oceans,  stretching  out  towards  what  is  now  America  on  the 

* The  femur  of  a large  bird  allied  to  the  Dinornis  was  lately  found  in  the 
Gympsie  gold  diggings,  Australia,  at  the  great  depth  of  180  feet  below  the 
surface.  — Times , July  14,  1867, 


TEE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


441 


west,  and  India  on  the  east,  that  this  continent  was  broken 
up  into  islands,  of  which  some  became  amalgamated  with 
what  is  now  Asia,  and  that  in  Madagascar  and  the  Mascarene 
Islands  we  have  existing  relics  of  that  great  continent. 

The  age  of  trees  may  also  be  used  as  a minor  proof  of 
antiquity.  There  are  trees  in  Africa  and  South  America  said 
to  be  from  five  to  six  thousand  years  old  (probably  they  may 
be  half  that  age),  as  the  Baobab  of  the  one,  and  the  Taxodium 
of  the  other,  but  in  Australia  the  largest  specimens  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom  are  to  be  found.  The  Ficus  Macrophyllus, 
called  the  Moreton  Bay  fig,  is  remarkable  for  its  colossal  pro- 
portions ; an  example  gro  wing  on  the  Manning  River,  exhibited 
a bulk  superior  to  any  of  the  Baobabs  of  Africa  or  Chestnuts 
of  Etna,  in  fact,  larger  than  any  tree  with  a single  stem  which 
has  ever  been  mentioned  by  travellers ; it  is  a peculiarity  of 
this  tree  to  throw  out  buttresses  of  wood  all  round  the  trunk ; 
as  they  do  not  grow  in  contact  with  each  other,  it  would  be 
unfair  to  give  the  measurement  of  a line  drawn  round  them 
for  the  dimensions  of  the  tree,  but  at  six  feet  from  the  ground 
the  circumference  of  the  real  cylindrical  part  of  the  trunk  was 
sixty-six  feet,  measured  as  if  the  tape  had  passed  through 
the  projecting  parts ; at  the  same  height,  if  the  buttresses 
had  been  included,  the  measurement  would  have  been 'one 
hundred  and  ten  feet,  and  at  half  the  height  three  hun- 
dred ; the  partitions  would  have  afforded  stalls  for  the  horses 
of  a squadron  of  dragoons.  The  Australian  cedar  has  been 
found  with  a circumference  of  forty  feet,  but  in  the  report  of 
the  Commission  appointed  by  the  Government  of  Victoria, 
it  is  mentioned,  that  near  the  source  of  the  western  branch 
of  the  Wori  Yallock  Creek,  a tree  (Eucalyptus  amygdalinaj 
was  measured  which  had  been  felled,  it  was  three  hundred 
and  thirty  feet  long  in  a straight  line,  with  a diameter  of 
nineteen  at  the  base,  and  nine  at  seventy  feet  from  the  butt 
end  • many  of  the  adjacent  standing  trees  were  evidently  of 
much  greater  height  than  this. 

Nor  must  the  trees  of  New  Zealand  be  omitted.  The 
Kauri  (Damara  Australis)  attaining  a height  of  two  hundred 
feet,  with  a circumference  of  forty;  this  great  shaft  rising 


442 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


with,  a very  gradual  diminution  of  size  to  upwards  of  a 
hundred  feet  without  a single  branch. 

Lyell,  as  well  as  Hugh  Miller,  was  struck  with  the  simi- 
larity of  the  New  Zealand  flora  to  that  of  the  European  coal 
measures  ; to  the  same  effect  is  the  observation  of  Ansted  : — 
“ It  is  a remarkable  fact,  the  flora  of  the  carboniferous  period 
is  found,  to  a great  extent,  uniform  in  those  parts  of  the  globe 
from  which  the  principal  carboniferous  fossils  have  been 
obtained,  and  if  we  wish  to  compare  this  ancient  flora  with 
those  which  bear  resemblance  to  it  at  present,  either  in  the 
general  preponderance  of  particular  plants,  or  in  the  total 
absence  of  others,  we  must  leave  the  northern  hemisphere, 
and  transport  ourselves  to  the  islands  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  our  antipodes,  where  New  Zealand  and  Australia,  together 
with  an  innumerable  multitude  of  small  islands,  form  almost 
the  only  land  in  the  vast  area  between  the  tropic  of  Capricorn 
and  the  antarctic  circle.”  Whilst  such  are  the  views  of 
geologists  who  never  visited  those  parts,  and  who  wrote 
when  few  scientific  men  had  personally  inspected  them,  it 
is  especially  satisfactory  to  have  the  opinion  of  one  who  has 
actually  examined  them. 

Dr.  Hochstetter,  the  geologist  of  the  Austrian  expedition, 
who  visited  those  shores  in  the  u Novara  ” in  1859,  speaking 
of  the  wingless  birds  whose  fossil  remains  he  was  so  fortunate 
to  obtain  in  great  abundance,  makes  the  following  remarks  : 
“ These  gigantic  birds  belong  to  an  era  prior  to  the  human 
race,  to  a post-tertiary  period,  and  it  is  a remarkably  incom- 
prehensible fact  of  the  creation,  that,  whilst  at  the  very  same 
period  in  the  old  world,  elephants,  rhinoceroses,  hippopo- 
tami ; in  South  America  gigantic  sloths  and  armadillos ; in 
Australia  gigantic  kangaroos,  wombats,  and  dasyuri,  were 
living,  the  colossal  forms  of  animal  life  were  represented  in 
New  Zealand  by  gigantic  birds,  which  walked  the  shores 
then  untrod  by  the  foot  of  any  quadruped.” 

It  remains  to  be  proved  whether  those  gigantic  birds  have 
entirely  disappeared ; if  they  have,  it  is  only  since  those 
islands  have  been  colonized.  Not  only  have  we  found  the 
bones  of  the  moa  in  the  native  ovens,  but  also  their  egg 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


443 


shells  with  one  end  charred,  evidently  proving  that  they  had 
been  cooked  and  used  as  food.  Meurant,  an  old  sealer,  who 
was  acquainted  with  the  country  fifty  years  ago,  stated 
that  he  saw  the  leg  of  a moa  cooked,  which  was  offered 
him  as  food,  he  expressed  his  horror,  thinking  it  was  part  of 
a human  being,  but  was  assured  it  belonged  to  a bird. 

It  is  only  quite  recently  that  traces  of  a living  moa  have 
been  observed ; whilst  Mr.  Brunner,  chief  surveyor  of  the 
province  of  Nelson,  and  Mr.  Maling  of  the  survey  depart- 
ment, accompanied  by  a native,  were  engaged  in  surveying 
on  the  ranges  between  the  Riwaka  and  Takaka  valleys,  they 
observed  one  morning,  on  going  to  their  work,  the  foot- 
prints of  what  appeared  to  be  a large  bird,  whose  tracks  they 
followed  for  a short  distance,  but  lost  them  at  last  among 
rocks  and  scrub  ; the  footprints,  which  were  well  defined 
wherever  the  ground  was  soft,  were  fourteen  inches  in 
length,  with  a spread  of  eleven  at  the  points  of  the  three 
toes,  the  footmarks  were  about  thirty  inches  apart. 

On  examining  the  bones  of  a moa’s  foot  in  the  Wellington 
Museum,  the  toe  was  found  to  measure  without  integuments 
eight  inches  and  a half,  and  it  evidently  belonged  to  a skeleton 
of  a very  large  bird ; the  length  of  the  impression  of  the  toe 
observed  by  those  gentlemen  was  ten  inches ; the  size  of 
the  footprints,  and  the  great  stride  of  the  bird,  could  only 
have  been  those  of  the  moa,  and  has  led  to  the  belief  that  a 
solitary  one  may  yet  be  in  existence.  The  district  is  full  of 
limestone  caves,  of  the  same  character  as  those  in  the  neigh- 
bouring district  of  Aorere,  where  such  a quantity  of  moa 
bones  were  found ; it  is  highly  probable  that  it  was  a night 
bird,  like  its  congener  the  kiwi,  hence  the  difficulty  of  ascer- 
taining whether  it  still  survives. 

The  recent  existence,  therefore,  of  such  birds,  the  charac- 
teristic inhabitants  of  a post-tertiary  period,  together  with 
the  ancient  and  primitive  character  of  the  New  Zealand  isles, 
justifies  the  conclusion  that  the  southern  hemisphere  as  a 
whole,  and  those  islands  in  particular,  have  preserved  that 
state  of  vegetation  and  peculiar  forms  of  life  which  existed 
in  the  other  half  of  the  globe,  at  that  remote  period  when 
similar  organizations  and  conditions  prevailed. 


444 


THE  AGE  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


1.  That  man,  in  fact,  in  those  regions,  stands  on  a more 
ancient  platform,  and  is  surrounded  by  far  more  ancient 
forms  of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  than  even  his  grand  pro- 
genitor Adam  did  at  his  creation. 

2.  That  New  Zealand  is  probably  the  oldest  surface  of 
our  planet  remaining,  still  preserving  with  little  change  its 
primaeval  condition,  from  not  having  been  submerged  with 
the  rest  of  the  grand  southern  continent. 

3.  That  Australia,  at  a later  period,  was  severed  from  the 
Asiatic  continent,  and  still  possesses  the  peculiar  flora  and 
fauna  belonging  to  the  period  following  the  convulsion  which 
separated  it  from  New  Zealand. 

4.  That  still  later  America  was  severed  from  the  remain- 
ing portion  of  the  southern  continent,  as  well  as  Africa,  each 
preserving  the  flora  and  fauna  of  a later  period,  and  so 
severally  presenting  as  many  steps  of  ascent  from  the  lowest 
floor  of  the  earth's  ancient  surface  to  its  most  recent  one,  from 
the  liassic  age  up  to  the  one  we  live  in,  and  that  these  enable 
us  to  see,  in  actual  existence,  what  is  only  elsewhere  to  be 
found  in  a fossil  state. 

5.  That  these  steps  form  a geological  flight  of  stairs, 
which  connect  one  of  the  lowest  with  the  highest,  or,  in 
other  words,  one  of  the  oldest  with  the  most  recent  plat- 
form of  the  earth.  The  first  and  lowest  step  being  New 
Zealand,  and  some  of  the  neighbouring  isles,  with  their 
wingless  birds;  next  Australia,  with  its  marsupial  races, 
serpents,  and  saurians ; then  America,  with  its  sloths,  tapirs, 
and  armadillos  ; then  Africa  and  Asia,  with  their  elephants, 
hippopotami,  rhinoceroses,  giraffes,  &c. ; and  lastly  Europe, 
with  its  familiar  families  of  creatures,  over  which  man  presides. 

6.  That  animal  and  botanic  centres  are  to  be  viewed  as 
epochs  of  creation,  originally  of  the  widest  distribution,  and 
probably  commensurate  in  extent  with  the  earth’s  surface. 

7.  That  these  several  surfaces  preserve  the  peculiar 
conditions  of  each,  which  by  subsequent  convulsions  have 
disappeared  from  other  parts  ; that  whilst  many  grand  links 
in  the  chain  of  nature  may  have  been  lost,  these  still  remain. 

8.  That  the  southern  continent,  of  wrhich  so  small  a por- 


THE  AGE  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


445 


tion  survives,  is  again  rising,  and  will  be  eventually  revealed 
but  with  superincumbent  strata  more  nearly  resembling  the 
later  formations  of  the  northern ; that  the  cretaceous  deposit 
which  now  is  chiefly  represented  by  the  coral  isles,  will  then 
appear  as  conspicuously  as  in  the  other  hemisphere. 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  therefore,  however  strange  it 
may  seem,  that  this  Britain  of  the  south,  the  last  appendage 
of  our  empire,  is,  in  a geological  point  of  view,  immeasurably 
older  than  the  parent  isle,  and  was  in  being  long  before — 

“ Britain  arose  from  out  the  azure  main.” 


NEW  ZEALAND  ADIANTUM  RENEFORME,  LIVING  FERN. 


ROTO  HAHANA,  THE  WARM  LAKE  AND  ITS  BOILING  SPRINGS. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


The  solitary  position  of  these  Islands,  separated  by  such  a 
wide  expanse  of  ocean  from  the  continent  of  America  on  the 
east,  and  Australia  on  the  west,  their  size  and  extent  forming 
a belt  of  more  than  a thousand  miles  in  length,  together  with 
our  recent  acquaintance  with  their  existence,  give  them  a 
great  geological  interest. 

When  we  look  at  the  map  of  the  World,  we  cannot  fail  to 
observe  the  apparently  continuous  line  of  islands  which  stretch 
southward  from  Japan  to  New  Zealand.*  These  at  once  strike 
the  eye  of  the  geologist,  as  being  the  disrupted  fragments  of 

* An  ancient  continuous  line  of  land  will  account  for  the  presence  of  wingless 
birds,  such  as  the  Apterix  Australis  or  Kiwi  and  the  Dinornis  or  Moa  on  these 
islands.  Capt.  King,  R.N.,  states,  there  are  soundings  from  the  Three  Kings 
to  Norfolk  Island. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


447 


an  ancient  continental  line ; nor  can  we  help  noticing  that 
its  general  direction  is  parallel  to  another,  extending  from 
the  Asiatic  Continent,  along  the  entire  length  of  Australia, 
and  further,  that  these  two  closely  correspond,  in  the  direc- 
tion they  take,  with  two  others,  which  are  on  a still  grander 
scale,*  the  first  comprising  the  entire  western  coast  of  the 
two  Americas,  the  other  taking  in  the  western  sides  of  Africa 
and  Europe. 

These  four  continental  lines  may,  therefore,  be  termed  the 
grand  costae,  or  ribs  of  the  world,  since  they  have  withstood 
all  those  convulsions  which  have  so  materially  changed  the 
face  of  our  globe,  and  very  probably  submerged  the  far 
greater  portion  of  the  southern  hemisphere ; they  moreover 
possess  such  distinctive  features  both  in  the  character  of 
their  Botany,  Zoology,  and  Ornithology,  as  to  mark  each  of 
them  as  being  a separate  centre.  Australia  differs  in  its 
various  productions,  from  every  other  part;  New  Zealand, 
also,  as  widely  from  it,  as  the  former  does  from  the  rest  of 
the  world. 

If  any  weight  be  due  to  the  conjecture  that  the  New 
Zealand  Isles  were  the  remains  of  a grand  continental  line, 
they  may  claim  an  equal  antiquity  with  them,  and  destroy 
the  common  idea  of  their  comparatively  recent  origin  ; that 
they  have  been  constantly  undergoing  changes  in  their  length 
and  breadth,  and  are  still  far  from  being  in  a state  of  qui- 
escence, is  evident,  but  that  their  general  framework  is  as 
ancient  as  that  of  other  parts  of  the  earth's  surface,  appears 
unquestionable. 

* It  is  remarkable  that  the  gold  regions  chiefly  lie  in  these  lines.  Spain,  and 
the  coast  of  Africa,  which  by  way  of  distinction  is  named  the  Gold  Coast,  form- 
ing one.  The  American  line  taking  in  Peru,  Mexico,  and  California.  The 
Australian  line,  Port  Philip,  New  South  Wales,  Borneo,  and  several  of  the 
Indian  Isles  : and  further  acquaintance  with  the  Geology  of  New  Zealand  may 
show  that  it  also  abounds  in  this  precious  ore,  for  if  we  regard  these  continental 
lines  as  being  waves  of  primal  upheavement,  and  gold  being  probably  the  most 
ancient  metal,  it  is  naturally  to  be  looked  for  in  the  most  ancient  fissures  of  the 
earth’s  surface,  in  which  it  was  formed. 

[Since  this  note  was  printed  in  1850,  the  Author’s  conjectures  have  proved 
correct,  and  he  has  the  credit  of  having  been  the  first  who  made  them.  The 
Gold  Fields  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand  having  since  been  discovered.] 


448 


THE  GEOLOGY  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


The  geological  features  in  New  Zealand  are  so  clearly 
marked,  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  detecting  the  character 
of  the  agent  employed.  New  Zealand  may  be  properly 
called  a volcanic  country,  since  nearly  half  its  mountains 
are  extinct  craters  : volcanic  action,  however,  seems  to 
have  been  greater  in  particular  localities ; in  the  north  the 
centre  was  at  Otaua,  near  the  Bay  of  Islands,  which  is 
a remarkable  district;  an  immense  crater  rises  above  the 
level  of  the  surrounding  country,  with  steep  precipitous 
cliffs  of  pipeclay,  which,  on  the  summit,  incline  inwards, 
so  as  to  form  a vast  bowl  several  miles  in  diameter ; this 
appears  to  have  been  formerly  a huge  crater  ; but  when  that 
became  exhausted,  a series  of  smaller  ones  broke  out  on  the 
sides,  which  are  more  or  less  active,  and  filled  with  water  of 
great  depth,  from  which  streams  of  gas  escape  in  every  part ; 
one  of  these  crater  lakes  contains  white  mud,  which  bubbles 
up  in  all  directions ; in  another,  the  heated  gas  is  emitted 
from  innumerable  pores,  the  highest  degree  of  temperature 
being  196  Fab..,  the  ground  seems  to  be  constantly  subsiding, 
probably  in  the  same  degree  as  the  mud  is  ejected  from  the 
neighbouring  spots ; it  is  evident,  that  after  the  grand  crater 
became  extinct,  it  was  covered  with  a most  luxuriant  growth 
of  Kauri  timber,  the  leaves  of  which,  in  some  places,  form 
a turf  stratum  of  nearly  twelve  feet ; in  every  part  the  im- 
mense roots  are  still  perfect  in  the  ground,  the  smaller  ones 
being  encased  with  pure  sulphur ; the  lakes  also  are  filled 
with  timber,  and  even  the  leaves  and  cones  are  as  fresh  as 
though  they  had  just  fallen  from  them.* 

The  surrounding  plain  of  Taiamai  is  covered  with  scoria 
and  large  masses  of  rock,  which  have  evidently  been  ejected 
from  some  of  the  many  neighbouring  craters  ; there  are  also 
large  quantities  of  conglomerated  iron  sand,  which  every- 

* These  parts  are  resorted  to  by  scrofulous  and  diseased  natives,  especially 
females,  from  the  Bay  of  Islands,  for  the  benefit  of  vapour  baths,  to  form  which 
they  simply  scoop  out  a little  hollow  in  the  sand,  about  a foot  deep,  lining  it 
with  old  mats,  upon  which  the  patient  is  placed  with  a blanket  thrown  over 
the  person  to  keep  in  the  heat.  The  invalids  generally  remain  about  a month 
at  the  baths,  and  have  little  temporary  huts  erected,  which  give  a singular 
appearance  to  this  lonely  and  desolate  region. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


449 


where  abounds,  and  resembles  that  of  Taranaki,  though  of 
far  larger  and  brighter  grain. 

Near  Pakaraka  there  is  a remarkable  volcanic  cone,  up- 
wards of  four  hundred  feet  high  ; the  mountain  is  hollow, 
and  may  be  descended  full  three  hundred  feet,  the  sides  are 
vitrified,  and  the  small  space  at  the  bottom  is  covered  with 
masses  of  rock  and  timber.  At  a little  distance  from  the 
mountain  there  is  a small  lake  whose  surplus  waters  have  a 
subterranean  outlet,  and  from  the  neighbouring  scoriaceous 
rock,  gas  is  emitted  in  such  quantities  and  force,  that  a 
bladder  applied  to  one  of  the  orifices  may  be  easily  filled. 

Pukenui  is  another  extinct  volcano  in  the  same  neighbour- 
hood, having  at  its  base  the  fine  lake  Mapere ; on  the  opposite 
side  rises  a remarkable  hill  called  Putai,  formed  entirely  from 
the  deposit  of  boiling  springs,  which  once  abounded  there ; 
the  mass  of  the  hill  is  a soft,  ochreous  substance,  filled  with 
minute  plates  of  mica ; on  the  top  are  several  apertures  of 
great  depth,  through  which,  doubtless,  the  hot  water  was 
ejected  ; at  the  base  also  are  innumerable  deep  chasms,  from 
some  of  which  gas  still  escapes ; lava  streams  and  basaltic 
rocks  abound  throughout  that  region,  clearly  marking  it  as 
having  once  formed  a grand  centre  of  action,  the  range  of 
which  extended  as  far  north  as  Wangaroa  Harbour,  which 
also  exhibits  incontestable  proofs  of  fearful  disruptions  and 
upheavements. 

Passing  on  to  the  vicinity  of  Auckland,  the  attention  is  at 
once  arrested  by  the  number  of  ancient  craters  which  arise 
from  the  surrounding  plain.  There  are  several  remarkable 
subterranean  lava  passages,*  and  partial  subsidings,  which 
are  well  worth  being  noticed  ; the  lava,  in  many  places, 
flowed  under  ground  at  such  an  inconsiderable  depth,  as  to 
bake  all  the  superincumbent  soil  to  the  consistency  of  brick, 
which  contains  many  beautiful  impressions  of  the  leaves  of 

* Those  called  the  “Three  Kings,”  in  particular,  are  well  worth  the  geolo- 
gist’s attention  ; they  are  evidently  subterraneous  lava  courses  ; in  some  places 
the  pressure  of  the  lava  has  caused  the  soil  above  to  fall  in,  leaving  wide  aper- 
tures, by  which  the  visitor  now  descends  into  them  ; the  natives  formerly  used 
them  as  places  of  sepulture. 


G G 


450 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


trees  which  formerly  grew  there.  At  Mahurangi  there  are 
several  warm  springs  which,  from  their  vicinity  to  Auckland, 
will  eventually  be  much  frequented. 

The  next  centre  appears  to  be  Waka-ari,  White  or  Sulphur 
Island,  which  with  its  neighbour  Moutohora,  Whale  Island, 
are  still  in  action ; the  latter  indeed  is  chiefly  filled  with  solfa- 
tara  and  hot  springs,  but  the  former  is  a volcano  rising  out 
of  the  sea,  from  the  crater  of  which  a volume  of  smoke  is 
always  ascending,  visible  at  a great  distance ; large  masses 
of  sulphur  are  there  produced,  and  the  varied  form  and  cha- 
racter of  the  molten  rocks  of  this  crater  are  very  interesting. 

The  grand  centre  of  volcanic  action  extends  from  White 
Island  to  Kotorua,  and  thence  by  Taupo  and  Tongariro  to 
Wanganui,  a distance  of  nearly  two  hundred  miles,  forming 
a continuous  line  across  the  entire  width  of  the  island.  The 
number  of  solfatara,  boiling  gulfs,  and  mud  pools  in  that 
line  is  extraordinary,  they  are  seen  in  every  direction — in 
the  forest,  in  the  plain,  and  in  the  water ; a large  number 
are  concentrated  at  a place  called  Tikitere,  and  a most  extra- 
ordinary assemblage  of  them  is  found  at  Ohinemotu,  which 
renders  that  place  one  of  the  most  remarkable  in  New 
Zealand.  At  Paeroa,  near  the  Waikato,  there  is  one  of  the 
largest  of  these  mud  pools,  it  is  from  sixty  to  a hundred  feet 
wide,  in  the  centre  first  an  enormous  bubble  arises,  which 
gradually  increases  in  height  and  size,  and  at  last  becomes  a 
jet  of  mud  eight  or  ten  feet  high,  with  several  smaller  ones 
around  it ; this  is  thrown  up  in  large  masses  on  the  sides, 
where  it  dries,  and  assumes  a cubical  form,  readily  separating 
into  laminge  of  different  thickness,  which  bears  a close  resem- 
lance  to  slate,  and,  perhaps,  in  this  mud  vortex  is  to  be  seen, 
on  a small  scale,  what  was  once  the  state  of  a large  portion 
of  the  earth’s  crust  during  the  formation  of  slate. 

At  Orakokorako,  on  the  Waikato,  the  boiling  springs  are 
almost  innumerable ; some  of  them  shoot  up  a volume  of 
water  to  a considerable  height,  and  are  little,  if  at  all,  in- 
ferior to  the  Geysers  of  Iceland ; a village  is  placed  in  the 
midst  of  them  ; the  reason  assigned  for  living  in  such  a 
singular  locality  was,  that  as  there  is  no  necessity  for  fires. 


A GEYSER  AND  WARM  SPRING. 


' 


THE  GEOLOGY  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


451 


all  their  cooking  being  done  in  the  hot  springs,  the  womens 
backs  are  not  broken  with  carrying  fuel,  and  further,  from 
the  warmth  of  the  ground,  they  were  enabled  to  raise  their 
crops  several  weeks  earlier  than  their  neighbours ; but,  as  a 
counterbalance  for  these  advantages,  many  fatal  accidents 
occur  from  persons,  especially  strangers  and  children,  falling 
into  those  fearful  caldrons. 

Roto  Mahana,  a warm  water  lake  of  considerable  size,  is 
surrounded  with  innumerable  boiling  gulfs  ; in  fact,  it  is  it- 
self nothing  but  a crater,  the  sides  of  which  are  full  of 
action ; it  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  singular  places  in  the 
world,  its  boiling  springs,  and  natural  snow-white  terraces 
formed  from  silicious  deposits,  are  as  wonderful  as  they  are 
beautiful.  Thence  to  Hohake  and  Rotokawa  there  is  nothing 
to  be  seen  but  jets  of  vapour,  and  so  on  to  Taupo,  where  fear- 
ful gulfs  abound  at  both  extremities  of  that  noble  lake ; many 
of  these  boiling  springs  at  Rangatira  and  Tokanu  possess  the 
property  of  changing  the  nature  of  anything  which  may  be 
placed  in  them,  and  converting  them  into  a beautiful  silicious 
substance  of  pure  white,  and  this  is  done  without  any  appa- 
rent addition  of  matter ; but  if  the  article  be  not  entirely 
immersed,  having  only  the  water  flowing  about  it,  then  it 
becomes  enlarged  by  the  deposit  upon  its  surface  ; the 
process  of  thus  converting  wood  into  stone  is  very  rapid,  and 
in  some  localities,  water  does  not  appear  to  be  a necessary 
agent  in  accomplishing  this  change ; at  Rotorua,  large  pieces 
of  wood  are  thus  agatized  by  the  aid  of  heated  gas,  highly 
charged  with  sulphur,  alum,  and  iron,  or  other  chemical 
substances,  which  penetrate  the  pores  of  the  wood,  and  fill 
them  up  with  silex,  converting  them  into  agates,  and  even 
giving  them  the  transparency  of  chalcedony. 

At  Roto-aira,  a beautiful  lake  at  the  base  of  the  Tongariro 
range,  which  attains  an  elevation  of  10,236  feet,  boiling 
springs  also  abound ; the  volcano  itself  is  not  so  lofty,  from 
its  cone  it  constantly  sends  forth  a volume  of  smoke,  and 
occasionally  of  flame,  which  has  been  distinctly  seen  at  a 
distance  of  a hundred  and  fifty  miles,*  and  although  the 

* Formerly,  when  Tongariro  emitted  flame,  the  natives  regarded  it  as  a com- 

G G 2 


452 


THE  GEOLOGY  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


powers  of  this  fearful  volcano  appear  to  have  long  lain  dor- 
man  t,  there  is  no  security  that  it  will  not  break  out  again. 
The  size  and  active  operation  of  Mount  Erebus  appear  to  be 
the  grand  security  of  New  Zealand,  and  that  crater  may  be 
viewed  as  its  safety-valve  ; for,  if  anything  were  to  impede 
its  operation,  the  entire  line  of  New  Zealand  craters  would, 
very  probably,  break  out  again ; lofty  as  Tongariro  now 
appears,  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  its  present  height 
is  much  less  than  it  was  formerly ; or  rather,  that  the  grand 
crater  of  former  days  has  sunk  down,  and,  in  doing  so,  caused 
Mount  Taranaki  to  rise  up  ; this  is  agreeable  with  native 
tradition, f and,  also,  with  the  general  features  of  the  sfot,  a 
space  of  nearly  twelve  miles  intervening  between  the  two 
principal  mountains,  Tongariro  and  Ruapehu,  which,  at  a 
distance,  appears  to  be  elevated  table  land,  but  is  in  fact  a 
deep  lake. 

The  matter  ejected  from  these  craters  has  been  immense, 
chiefly  pumice  stones  and  sand  : the  central  plains  had  once 
a super-stratum  of  yellow  ochre,  and  were  heavily  timbered. 
The  hot  pumice  ejected  from  the  neighbouring  volcanoes, 
appears  to  have  first  charred  the  forest  and  then  covered  it 
to  the  depth,  in  many  places,  of  a hundred  feet,  and  wherever 
there  is  a deep  ravine,  the  charred  timber  is  seen  jutting  out 
in  large  masses ; this  deposit,  in  some  places,  extends  a very 
long  way;  and,  even  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wanganui,  the  low 
lands  are  deeply  covered  with  it,  as  well  as  with  solid  lumps 
of  charred  wood.  That  Tongariro  has  caused  the  forma- 

mand  from  their  Atua  to  make  war ; and  when  the  coast  natives  saw  it,  they 
always  expected  an  invasion  from  Taupo. 

* The  tradition  is  that  Tongariro  became  jealous  of  Taranaki,  and  accused 
him  of  being  too  intimate  with  Pianga,  another  neighbouring  mountain  ; they 
fought,  and  Taranaki  being  worsted,  set  off  one  night  down  the  Wanganui, 
thus  forming  the  channel  of  the  river  ; he  crossed  over  by  Wai  Totara,  leav- 
ing a fragment  there,  and  then  fixed  himself  in  his  present  position.  The 
spot  where  he  formerly  stood  is  now  occupied  by  a deep  lake,  which  still  bears 
the  name  of  Taranaki,  and  is  Supposed  to  be  a kind  of  Pandemonium,  the  grand 
abode  of  all  the  New  Zealand  gods  : this  is  probably  a fable  founded  on  fact. 

The  Wanganui  River  is  evidently  a volcanic  fissure,  flowing  in  many  places 
between  walls  of  several  hundred  feet  perpendicular  height,  and  cutting  through 
valleys  at  right  angles,  without  having  one  of  its  own. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


453 


tion  of  the  great  Taupo  lake,  by  the  subsiding  of  the  land 
to  supply  the  place  before  occupied  by  so  much  ejected 
matter,  appears  certain  ; and  further,  that  this  occurred 
at  different  intervals,  for,  although  the  ancient  extent  of 
the  lake  was  nearly  double  what  it  is  at  present,  it  seems 
to  have  become  wider  and  deeper  than  formerly ; many 
trunks  of  trees  are  still  visible  in  its  waters,  which  were 
there  when  the  country  was  first  peopled,  and  are  so  well 
known  that  each  bears  the  name  of  some  ancestor;  what 
is  here  said  of  Taupo,  applies  also  to  all  the  neighbour- 
ing lakes  ; but  whilst  their  basins  were  thus  formed  to 
the  extent  of  matter  ejected,  it  is  evident  that  the  throes 
of  the  volcanoes  mainly  contributed  to  the  elevation  of  the 
country  ; from  the  sea  to  the  base  of  Taupo  there  is  a regular 
series  of  stages,  several  of  which  contain  plains  of  different 
elevation,  each  separated  from  the  other  by  deep  fissures,  one 
rising  higher  than  another,  until  we  reach  the  central  plains 
of  Tongariro,  thence  the  country  gradually  slopes  to  the 
north.  But  although  much  of  the  upheavement  of  the  land 
occurred  during  the  time  these  volcanoes  were  in  eruption, 
it  is  also  evident  that  even  yet  the  land  is  rising ; this  must 
be  solely  attributed  to  the  agency  of  earthquakes.  The 
southern  and  central  parts  of  the  island  appear  to  be  the 
principal  seat  of  their  action ; and  though,  in  general,  the 
shocks  are  slight,  yet,  periodically,  every  five  or  six  years, 
they  have  been  more  violent,  and  attended  with  more  serious 
consequences. 

In  the  year  1843,  Wanganui  was  the  chief  centre  of  volcanic 
movement most  of  the  chimneys  in  the  little  settlement  were 
thrown  down,  the  church  was  much  injured,  and  the  earth 
opened  in  parallel  fissures,  one  of  which  was  two  feet  wide  ; 
the  cliffs  had  every  appearance  of  being  upheaved  a foot  on 
one  side  of  the  river,  whilst  the  ground  on  the  other,  perhaps, 
subsided  as  much ; the  shocks  invariably  came  from  the  same 
quarter,  W.N.W. ; much  sulphureous  gas  also  escaped,  which 
for  a time  affected  the  health  of  the  place  ; the  movement 
seemed  chiefly  to  follow  the  course  of  the  river,  whose  channel 
may  be  regarded  as  a fissure  on  a large  scale. 


454 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


The  next  alarming  one  took  place  about  two  o’clock  on 
Monday  roomings  October  16th,  1848,  when  a series  of 
heavy  shocks  were  felt;  this  visitation  established  one  in- 
teresting fact,  that  the  disturbing  cause  is  not  stationary : 
the  quarter  from  which  it  proceeded  had  shifted  since  the 
year  1843  from  W.N.W.  to  W.S.W.  : it  afterwards,  how- 
ever, returned  to  its  former  quarter ; the  shocks  appeared  to 
commence  gradually,  and  were  preceded  by  the  usual  loud 
rumble ; the  movement  was  very  violent,  and  although  the 
motion  seemed  to  come  from  the  west,  the  same  as  in  all 
preceding  ones,  still  it  was  more  from  the  south  than 
usual,  and  there  was  also  a lateral  vibration  noticed.  This 
earthquake  was  followed  by  the  escape  of  noxious  gases ; 
afterwards  large  quantities  of  bitumen  or  asphaltum  were 
washed  up  on  the  coast,  some  pieces  of  considerable 
weight.  At  Ohau  gas  was  ejected  from  circular  openings, 
surrounded  by  quicksands ; the  grand  centre  of  action  was 
at  Wellington,  where  most  of  the  houses  were  more  or  less 
injured ; indeed,  there  was  scarcely  a brick  building  left 
standing,  or  a single  chimney  which  was  not  thrown  down. 
Several  fissures  were  formed,  and  the  land  was  raised  so 
much  that  the  small  craft  which  were  accustomed  to  anchor 
close  in  shore,  were  obliged  to  change  their  ground. 

On  the  23rd  of  January  1855,  the  south-western  part  of 
New  Zealand  was  again  visited  with  the  most  severe  earth- 
quakes which  have  occurred  since  it  has  been  colonised. 
The  native  church  at  Wanganui  was  thrown  down,  as  well 
as  the  chimneys  of  the  Mission-house  ; in  various  parts  the 
ground  opened,  so  that  some  places  appeared  as  tThough  they 
had  been  ploughed  up  in  furrows ; large  quantities  of  gas 
and  water  were  ejected  from  many  circular  apertures,  around 
which,  mounds  several  yards  high  were  formed ; the  ground 
was  so  intersected  with  deep  ravines,  as  actually  to  stop  all 
travelling  for  a time ; at  Wellington,  the  harbour  is  stated 
to  have  been  raised  full  four  feet  and  a half,  and  similar 
changes  to  have  taken  place  in  several  parts  of  the  district. 

In  fact,  the  raising  of  sea-beaches  seems  to  have  been  of 
common  occurrence,  in  every  part  of  the  island  numerous 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


455 


instances  are  to  be  seen,  several  of  which  have  taken  place 
during  my  residence. 

But  although  there  is  abundant  proof  of  upheavement  still 
going  on  in  the  Northern  Island,  it  is  trifling  when  com- 
pared with  that  of  the  Middle  one.  The  Nelson  paper  of 
September  1847,  states,  that  the  hull  of  a vessel  was  lately 
discovered  on  the  western  coast,  lying  two  hundred  yards 
from  high  water  mark,  with  a small  tree  growing  through 
its  bottom  ; the  vessel  was  supposed  to  be  the  Active , which 
was  lost  in  1814.  How  great  an  alteration  must  that  locality 
have  undergone  since  it  was  stranded  there,  when  in  a period 
of  thirty-three  years  the  ocean  had  retired  to  a distance  of 
two  hundred  yards  from  the  shore  ; or,  in  other  words,  that 
part  of  the  coast  has  risen  to  such  an  extent,  as  to  remove 
the  hull  of  the  vessel  so  far  beyond  high  water  mark ; there 
is  reason  to  suppose  that  this  upheavement  of  the  coast  is 
not  confined  to  one  spot,  but  has  extended  the  entire  length 
of  the  island. 

From  the  evidence  of  a person  who  was  formerly  engaged 
in  sealing  at  Dusky  Bay,  as  far  back  as  the  year  1823,  it 
appears  that  from  1826  to  1827  there  was  an  almost  constant 
succession  of  earthquakes,  some  of  which  were  sufficiently 
violent  to  throw  men  down ; at  times,  he  and  his  party, 
who  then  resided  on  a small  island,  were  so  alarmed  lest  it 
should  be  submerged,  that  they  put  to  sea  : there,  however, 
they  found  no  safety,  for  such  was  the  flux  and  reflux  of 
the  ocean,  that  they  were  in  the  greatest  danger  of  being 
swamped,  and  were  thankful  to  get  on  shore  again;  the 
sealers  were  accustomed  to  visit  a small  cove  called  the  jail, 
which  was  a suitable  place  for  anchorage,  being  well  sheltered 
with  lofty  cliffs  on  every  side,  and  having  deep  water  in  it 
close  to  the  shore,  so  that  they  could  step  out  on  the  rocks 
from  their  boats  ; it  is  situated  about  eighty  miles  to  the 
north  of  Dusky  Bay ; after  the  earthquakes  the  locality  was 
completely  altered  ; the  sea  had  so  entirely  retired  from  the 
cove,  that  it  was  dry  land  ; beyond  Cascade  Point  the  whole 
coast  presented  a most  shattered  appearance,  so  much  so, 
that  its  former  state  could  scarcely  be  recognized  ; large 


456 


THE  GEOLOGY  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


masses  of  mountains  bad  fallen,  and  in  many  places  tlie  trees 
might  be  seen  under  water. 

From  these  circumstances,  it  is  evident  that  parts  of  the 
Middle  Island  are  rapidly  rising,  and  of  this  fact  there  are 
other  proofs  to  be  adduced.  Coal  measures  appear  at 
Massacre  Bay  and  Molyneux  River,  intermingled  with 
abundance  of  Kauri  resin,  this  noble  pine  is  not  now  found 
growing  within  ten  degrees  of  latitude  north  of  that  river; 
in  no  single  spot  within  that  wide  range  is  a Kauri  tree 
to  be  met  with  ; hence  we  conclude  that  the  climate  has 
considerably  altered,  since  that  carboniferous  deposit  was 
made ; but  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  back  to  that  probably 
remote  period ; the  Kauri  resin  is  still  found  on  the  surface 
of  the  land,  with  every  appearance  of  its  having  had  quite  as 
recent  an  origin  as  that  picked  up  in  the  north  ; it  is  most 
probable,  therefore,  that  the  tree  has  grown  in  those  latitudes 
at  a comparatively  recent  date  ; this  beautiful  pine  does 
not  seem  to  require  heat,  so  much  as  shelter  and  humidity. 
If  then  the  land  was  formerly  low  in  that  latitude,  the  cli- 
mate would  necessarily  be  humid  and  mild,  the  cold  being 
tempered  by  the  sea,  and  not  increased  by  the  propinquity 
of  snowy  mountains ; thus  the  Kauri  might  have  flourished 
there,  as  well  as  other  trees,  which  now  belong  to  a warmer 
climate.* 

x 

* Extract  of  Lieut.  -Governor  Eyre’s  letter,  describing  his  ascent  of  the  Kai 
Kouras,  a mountain  of  the  Middle  Island,  10,114  feet  high  : — 

Government  House,  26th  Nov.  1849. 

‘ ‘ Little  vegetation  on  the  hill,  but  mosses  and  lichens,  and  some  coarse 
grasses,  besides  prickly  plants,  of  which  the  ‘ Taramea  ’ is  the  chief ; but  the 
singular  part  was , that  on  so  steep  and  high  a hill , where  now  nothing  but  mosses 
and  lichens  grow , were  the  charred  remains  of  large  totara  trees , evidently  shew- 
ing that  the  ground  once  has  been  low  and  has  been  covered  with  forest , and  that 
it  has  been  pushed  up  within  a comparatively  recent  geological  period.  There  was 
grey  granite  on  the  highest  ridge.  E.  Eyre. 

Rev.  R.  Taylor.” 

Mr.  Clifford,  jun.,  stated  the  same  to  me,  and  further,  that  the  totara  is  not 
now  to  be  found  anywhere  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mountain,  although  there  large 
trunks  of  totara  trees,  generally  charred,  are  found  beyond  the  region  of  grass, 
where  nothing  but  moss  and  lichens  grow  ; he  also  said,  these  remarkable 
remains  of  trees  are  generally  laid  in  lines,  conveying  the  idea  of  drift  timber, 
deposited  on  the  precipitous  sides  of  the  mountain. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


457 


Another  proof  to  be  adduced  in  favour  of  this  opinion  is 
the  Moa  (Dinorms) , the  gigantic  ostrich  of  these  islands  ; 
the  struthious  race  of  birds  exclusively  belongs  to  a mild 
climate,  a warmer  one  than  that  where  the  remains  of  the 
moa  are  now  found ; formerly,  not  only  were  those  birds 
numerous  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  North  Island,  but 
also  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Middle  Island ; the  remains 
of  the  gigantic  moa  are  seldom  found  without  being  inter- 
mingled with  those  of  several  different-sized  species  of  the 
same  family ; hence  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  the  climate  was 
once  suitable  for  them,  since  they  abounded,  at  a compara- 
tively recent  period  their  bones  being  found  only  partially 
fossilized ; their  extinction  seems  to  imply  a change  of  climate 
no  longer  suitable  to  their  existence.* 

The  character  and  general  features  therefore  of  the  Middle 
Island  have  undergone  a great  change ; as  the  mountain 
ranges  became  more  an'd  more  elevated,  the  climate  must 
have  become  proportionably  refrigerated ; nor  has  this  been 
the  only  change  effected ; large  tracts  of  level  land  have  also 
been  upheaved ; that  this  has  already  been  the  case  to  a con- 
siderable extent  is  evident  from  the  extensive  plains  on  the 
eastern  side ; and  that  this  is  still  going  on  is  equally  so. 


REMARKABLE  BOULDERS  AT  WANGAPE,  ON  THE  NORTH-WEST  COAST. 

* It  is  singular  that  the  old  natives  affirm,  since  their  early  days  there  has 
been  a wonderful  decrease  of  the  birds  which  they  regarded  as  their  chief 
means  of  subsistence,  such  as  the  Kiwi,  Weka,  and  Kakapo  ; though  formerly 
so  abundant,  that  they  could  obtain  them  everywhere  without  difficulty,  they  are 
now  so  rare  as  seldom  to  be  met  with,  and  the  Kakapo  is  all  but  extinct  in  the 
Northern  Island. 


458 


THE  GEOLOGY  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


This  leads  to  the  consideration  of  sedimentary  deposits; 
these  are  chiefly  marine  or  lacustrine,  the  first  are  formed 
in  the  way  already  mentioned,  and  the  shoal  seas  around  a 
great  portion  of  these  islands  mark  their  extent.  On  the 
western  coast  of  the  North  Island,  it  is  evident  vast  tracts 
of  land  have  been  gained  from  the  sea,  by  the  deposits  of 
the  Wanganui,  Rangitikei,  and  Manawatu  rivers ; near  the 
coast,  in  that  part,  the  land  is  generally  low,  covered  with 
gravel  or  shingle,  and  large  quantities  of  drift  timber ; inland 
it  is  alternate  swamp  and  grass  with  parallel  ranges  of  ancient 
sand  hills  covered  with  a growth  of  fern,  formed  by  the 
inroads  of  the  sea  on  those  coasts  ; near  the  sea,  and  espe- 
cially at  the  mouth  of  rivers,  large  quantities  of  sand  are 
blown  up  from  the  shore,  and  form  drifting  sand  hills ; the 
mud  being  precipitated  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  by  the  coagu- 
lating action  of  salt  water,  there  gradually  forms  a compact 
mass  : but  the  sand  having  nothing  to  fix  it,  is  by  constant 
attrition  washed  finer  and  finer,  and  then  thrown  up  by  the 
high  tides  in  large  quantities  on  the  shore,  whence  the  sea 
breeze  speedily  conveys  it  inland. 

The  valleys  of  New  Zealand  are  not  numerous  or  exten- 
sive ; indeed  the  almost  entire  absence  of  them,  and  the 
acute  pointed  hills,  which  are  only  separated  from  each  other 
by  deep  ravines,  are  to  be  considered  as  amongst  the  pecu- 
liar features  of  the  country,  and  as  most  of  these  have  never 
been  touched  by  the  hand  of  man,  they  enable  the  Geologist 
to  discern  the  exact  state  they  were  in  when  first  upheaved  ; 
the  remarkable  way  in  which  the  surface  of  these  islands 
was  fractured  when  first  elevated,  is  yet  to  be  observed 
as  plainly  as  though  it  had  recently  taken  place  ; for  whilst 
one  side  of  a hill  is  covered  with  the  debris  of  primitive 
rocks,  gravel,  and  vegetable  mould,  the  other  is  either  ochre 
or  pipe  clay,  destitute  of  any  rolled  stone,  and  without  soil ; 
the  fern  also  on  one  side  is  of  a more  luxuriant  growth  than 
on  the  other.* 

Another  kind  of  deposit  remains  to  be  noticed,  the  vol- 
canic. Wherever  a volcano  has  arisen  in  the  sea,  or  its 
* The  country  is  cracked  at  an  angle  of  45 °. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


459 


vicinity,  it  lias  formed  sedimentary  strata  around,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  quantity  of  matter  ejected  : much  of  this  kind 
is  seen  at  Wangaroa,  and  HicVs  Bay,  where  the  rocks 
are  composed  of  volcanic  grit,  and  contain  most  of  the 
shells  now  found  on  the  coast ; deposits  of  this  kind  are 
doubtless  very  extensive  in  a country  where  such  agency  has 
been  so  general.  Whilst  the  Geologist  notices  these  strata 
and  the  volcanic  features  of  the  country,  he  is  also  struck 
with  the  signs  of  frequent  upheavements  he  meets  with ; no 
one  can  walk  from  Wanganui  to  Taranaki  without  observing 
the  many  alterations  of  level  which  have  taken  place  in  that 
district ; near  the  north  head  of  that  river,  at  low  water, 
may  be  seen  the  stumps  of  ancient  trees  still  maintaining 
their  position  in  the  sea ; and  on  the  shore  another  ancient 
surface  appears  with  numerous  trees  jutting  out,  which  are 
covered  with  lofty  sand  hills.  Wai  Totara — the  river  of 
Totara  trees — takes  its  name  from  a thick  grove  still  stand- 
ing in  its  bed,  which  so  obstructs  the  course  that  a canoe  can 
hardly  wind  its  way  amongst  the  many  trunks  which  rise  up 
in  it ; at  Manawa-pou,  where  the  cliffs  are  little  less  than 
four  hundred  feet  high,  large  stumps  are  also  seen  standing 
in  the  ocean,  where  they  have  braved  for  years  the  force  of 
the  violent  surf  which  breaks  upon  that  coast ; further  on,  the 
cliffs  become  even  yet  higher,  and  there  also  similar  remains 
of  forest  are  to  be  seen,  above  them  is  a thick  stratum  of  blue 
clay,  containing  numerous  marine  deposits ; upon  this  is  a 
former  surface  with  large  trunks  of  trees,  which  are  covered 
with  alternate  strata  of  gravel,  shingle,  and  sand ; then 
another  layer  of  timber,  upon  which  are  other  deposits, 
forming  the  present  surface  of  the  land. 

Wherever  these  ancient  levels  appear  on  the  sides  of  cliffs 
inland,  they  are  invariably  marked  by  lines  of  vegetation, 
showing  that  the  seeds  buried  in  that  old  soil  have  not  lost 
their  former  vitality,  how  many  convulsions  must  have  shat- 
tered the  land,  alternately  elevating  and  depressing  it,  allow- 
ing time  for  a stately  growth  of  timber,  then  sinking  it  again 
into  the  depths  of  the  ocean,  where,  year  after  year,  age 
after  age,  the  gradual  deposit  of  mud,  finally  attains  a thick- 


460 


THE  GEOLOGY  OE  NEW  ZEALAND. 


ness  of  more  than  a hundred  feet,  another  convulsion  up- 
heaves the  whole,  allows  time  for  another  growth  of  forest, 
when  all  again  subsides,  and  the  same  process  is  repeated ; 
the  traveller  along  the  coast  has  only  to  read  these  pages  of 
the  Earth's  history,  which  are  unfolded  for  his  instruction, 
and  reflect  upon  them  ; but  this  is  only  a page,  and  one 
which  is  visible  : another  remains  still  to  be  examined. 

The  sure  indications  of  coal,  which  further  along  the  coast 
crops  out,  betoken  a series  of  more  ancient  convulsions; 
modern  subsidings  of  the  earth's  surface  to  such  an  extent 
are  happily  rare,  although  doubtless  many  have  occurred 
in  places  where  there  were  none  to  see  or  make  them  known,* 
to  what  is  the  present  exemption  from  such  terrible  visita- 
tions in  these  islands  to  be  attributed,  but  to  the  volcanoes 
which  extend  through  them,  they  have  poured  forth  their 
streams  of  molten  rock,  filled  up  the  cracks  and  crevices  of 
the  earth's  crust,  strengthened  the  deficiencies  of  its  frame- 
work, and  thus  we  may  hope,  hindered  the  recurrence  of 
future  convulsions,  small  perhaps  as  is  the  extent  of  these 
islands  now  to  what  it  formerly  was,  these  streams  of  lava 
assist  in  stopping  further  encroachments  on  the  land,  thus 
while  the  ocean  is  rapidly  gaining  on  some  parts  of  the 
south-west  coast  of  the  Northern  Island,  the  promontory 
of  Cape  Egmont  presents  its  front  to  the  surge,  and  with- 
stands its  fury ; strengthened  by  numerous  streams  of  lava, 
which  are  plainly  seen  like  buttresses  at  every  headland 
from  that  Cape  as  far  as  the  Sugar-] oaf  rocks,  they  form  so 
many  barriers  to  the  sea's  further  inroads.  That  these 
islands  have  been  disrupted  by  former  convulsions,  is  seen 
by  a single  glance  at  the  map  ; but  the  period  is,  perhaps, 
as  far  back  as  the  general  disjunction  of  the  continental  line 
of  which  New  Zealand  is  only  a surviving  link. 

A few  words  remain  to  be  said  of  the  rocks  of  New  Zea- 

* The  natives  have  several  traditions  of  lands  and  islands  having  been  sub- 
merged. There  is  one  of  an  island  near  Taranaki,  which  had  a very  large 
Pa  upon  it  suddenly  sinking  with  all  its  inhabitants  during  the  night  ; of 
another  at  Patea,  and  of  a great  island  in  Cook’s  Straits,  called  Titapua,  thus 
disappearing. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


461 


land.  In  the  north,  the  basis  is  whin,  above  which  is  an 
ochreous  clay,  containing  bright  particles  of  magnetic  iron, 
which  abounds  from  the  North  Cape  to  the  Bay  of  Islands ; 
it  is  heaped  np  on  the  shores  in  hillocks  of  several  feet  in 
height ; as  it  has  been  found  to  make  the  best  steel  from  its 
containing  so  much  nickel,  it  must  eventually  prove  a valu- 
able article  of  commerce  ; steatite  is  also  common,  limestone 
shows  itself  in  various  localities,  and  when  it  comes  in  con- 
tact with  whin,  it  is  seen  in  apparently  half-melted  lumps 
in  the  midst  of  that  rock,  mixed  with  cinders  and  pieces 
of  felspar;  in  other  parts  it  assumes  an  amygdaloid  form. 
Another  line  of  limestone  appears  at  Mokau,  a third  at 


LIMESTONE  CAVE  NEAR  THE  MOKAU,  AT  PUKEMAPAU. 


Waiapu,  near  the  East  Cape,  apparently  in  parallel  ranges. 
These  are  nearly  destitute  of  fossils,  but  generally  partake 
more  of  the  purity  of  marble,  although  the  surface  rock 
contains  many  particles  of  clay  stone  gravel ; at  Mokau 
there  are  numerous  caves,  in  some  of  which  the  bones  of  the 
Moa  have  been  discovered,*  at  Wangaroa  gneiss  forms  the 

* About  a mile  from  Pukemapau  is  a large  cave  in  the  limestone  range, 
which  is  here  first  met  with,  it  is  called  Tanaure-ure  ; it  has  a large  lofty 
entrance,  with  a native  Fuschia  growing  at  its  mouth,  bearing  a more  delicate 
flower  than  that  of  the  ordinary  kind  ; huge  masses  of  stalactite  hang  pendant 
from  the  roof,  and,  further  in,  we  perceived  a chasm,  which,  when  a stone  was 
thrown,  told  us  there  was  water  at  the  bottom  ; by  the  aid  of  a candle,  we  found 
our  way  down,  when  we  came  to  a fine  crystal  stream,  about  a foot  or  so  deep, 


462 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


summit  of  the  two  mountains,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  The 
same  is  the  prevailing  rock  at  Taranaki,  and  of  the  inter- 
vening peaks  between  it  and  Tongariro  ; there  scoria  and 
fused  rocks  prevail  to  such  an  extent,  that  it  is  difficult  to 
say  what  is  the  basis  of  the  mountain  ; obsidian  and  pumice 
abound  near  Taupo  ; the  Tararua  range,  which  terminates  at 
Te  Pari-pari,  near  Kapiti,  has  a compact  slate  for  its  base  ,* 
copper  has  been  discovered  at  Doubtless  Bay,  and  at  the 
Kawa-kawa  and  Barrier  Islands  ; coal  is  found  of  good 
quality  up  the  Mokau,  Waikato,  and  Wanganui  Rivers,  and 
there  is  every  reason  to  suppose  that  it  will  be  a very  abun- 
dant mineral  in  these  islands,  as  the  grand  basin  extends 
nearly  the  entire  length  of  the  western  coast ; gold  has  been 
discovered  in  Coromandel  harbour ; there  the  rocks  are  of 
remarkably  pure  white  feltspar ; the  gold  contains  one-third 
silver,  and  is  found  in  thin  plates,  but  more  recently  in  large 
nuggets  and  greater  abundance  : it  is  said  to  have  been  also 
discovered  at  Ahuriri,  and  other  localities. 

Of  the  Middle  Island  it  may  be  stated  that  in  its  grand 
mountain  range,  which  extends  its  whole  length,  and  attains 
an  elevation  of  near  14,000  feet,  the  primitive  formations  pre- 
vail, and  already  are  found  to  be  rich  in  gold  and  precious 

which  was  soon  passed  ; having  ascended  the  opposite  side  about  twenty  feet, 
and  creeping  through  a narrow  passage  among  stalactites,  which  were  united 
with  the  floor,  we  entered  another  apartment  hung  with  transparent  ones  of 
every  form  and  size,  which  gave  it  quite  a fairy  look  ; thence  we  entered  two 
other  rooms,  equally  ornamented ; as  we  had  no  ladder,  we  could  not  reach 
other  passages,  which  were  some  height  from  the  floor,  and,  evidently,  led  to 
other  rooms  : travellers  who  had  visited  this  cave,  had  made  dreadful  havoc 
amongst  these  natural  beauties,  breaking  off  more  than  they  could  carry  away, 
but  many  had  evidently  been  broken  long  before  Europeans  could  have  done  so, 
and  formerly  the  natives  were  too  superstitious  to  enter  such  spots  : large  frac- 
tured stalactites,  having  smaller  ones  attached  to  their  extremities,  were  ob- 
served ; the  solid  rock,  too,  on  both  sides,  was  cracked  in  regular  lines,  this 
had  evidently  been  done  by  earthquakes,  which,  most  probably,  had  caused 
many  of  these  pendant  masses  to  fall ; some  of  the  stalactites  must  have  weighed 
a ton,  and  were  full  eight  feet  long,  and  two  in  diameter  : the  rock  was  of  a 
pure  cream  color  ; under  the  stalagmite  which  covered  the  floor  there  was  a 
layer  of  dark  vegetable  soil,  but,  although  it  was  dug  into,  no  bones  were 
found  ; the  length  of  the  cave  was  estimated  at  about  a hundred  feet  from  the 
entrance  ; the  natives  stated  that  there  were  many  similar  ones,  some  of  which 
are  quite  filled  with  Moa  bones. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OP  NEW  ZEALAND. 


463 


stones ; its  lakes,,  likewise,  are  numerous,  and,  of  consider- 
able size,  but  unlike  those  of  tbe  other  isle,  which  are  mainly 
owing  to  volcanic  subsidence,  these  are  basins  in  the  moun- 
tain ranges  generally  long  and  narrow  ; the  rock  which 
confers  its  native  name  on  the  island — Pounamu,  green  jade, 
is  abundant  and  highly  prized  by  the  New  Zealanders,  who 
manufacture  their  ornaments  and  the  much-valued  Meres 
from  it ; portions  of  it  are  so  transparent  and  lustrous  as  to 
render  it  worthy  a place  amongst  precious  stones,  and  in 
their  admiration  of  it  they  resemble  the  Chinese. 


HINE  MOA,  REMARKABLE  BASALTIC  COLUMNS  NEAR  ROTORUA,  ON  THE  KAINGAROA  ROAD. 


The  flood  which  occurred  in  the  Wangaehu  River  on  the 
13th  of  December  1859,  and  carried  away  the  bridge  which 
had  only  been  recently  erected,  was  of  an  extraordinary  kind, 
and  deserves  a short  notice.  This  river  takes  its  rise  from 
the  crater  of  the  Ruapehu,  a snowy  mountain,  which  forms 
the  most  conspicuous  object  of  our  landscape  ; rushing  from 
thence  along  a snowy  plain,  it  falls  over  a perpendicular  cliff 
some  two  thousand  feet  into  a deep  chasm ; the  upper  part 
of  this  huge  wall  is  a mass  of  ice,  and  even  there  this  river 
appears  to  be  a strong  stream  of  a milk  white  color,  being  in 
fact  diluted  sulphuric  acid. 

To  account  for  this  unexpected  flood,  which  occurred  in 
fine  dry  warm  weather,  it  is  most  likely  that  a long  con- 
tinuance of  heat  detached  a portion  of  this  great  cliff  sufficient 
to  arrest  the  course  of  the  river  and  form  a temporary  lake. 


464 


A VISIT  TO  ROTO  MAHAN  A. 


which,  gradually  rising  in  height;  until  its  barriers  were  no 
longer  able  to  resist  the  pressure;  gave  way;  and  then  the 
whole  volume  of  water;  rushing  along  with  immense  impetus; 
carried  the  huge  masses  of  ice  and  snow  with  it;  as  well  as 
all  the  trunks  of  drift  timber  it  met  with  in  its  passage ; the 
flood  overflowed  the  banks,  depositing  vast  quantities  of  ice, 
snow,  and  drift,  along  the  entire  course,  until  it  reached  the 
bridge,  which,  considering  the  winding  course  of  the  river, 
must  be  nearly  a hundred  miles  distant ; there  the  trunks 
and  blocks  of  ice  collected  in  such  quantities  that  they  were 
level  with  it,  and  formed  such  a compact  mass,  that  an 
observer  said  it  would  have  been  quite  possible  to  walk 
along  the  top  of  it  across  the  river ; the  poor  bridge  creaked, 
opened,  and  was  swept  away;  a man  passed  over  it  just  as 
it  was  parting  asunder ; being  of  wood,  the  floor  of  the  bridge 
suddenly  rose  several  feet,  he  had  rushed  over,  and  the  next 
instant  it  was  gone.  The  flood  came  down  about  6 a.m.,  aifd 
in  little  more  than  two  hours  it  subsided,  leaving  large 
masses  of  ice,  snow,  and  mud,  filled  with  crystals  of  ice,  on 
the  banks ; the  day  being  intensely  hot,  these  heaps  produced 
such  a vapour  as  to  appear  like  smoke,  the  ice  and  snow  were 
remarkably  compact,  very  black,  and  emitting  a strong  sul- 
phureous smell,  and  in  such  masses  as  actually  to  remain  for 
nearly  a week  under  the  mud. 

This  brief  account  may  be  concluded  with  a visit  paid  to 
Roto  Mahana,  or  the  Warm  Lake. 

The  first  view  of  it  is  very  striking,  and  cannot  fail  exciting 
the  travellers  astonishment ; the  lake  lies  in  a great  hollow, 
evidently  a crater,  flanked  with  lofty  precipices,  but  contain- 
ing a considerable  extent  of  low  swampy  land  along  one  of 
its  sides ; the  opposite  bank  is  formed  of  hills,  literally 
covered  with  boiling  springs,  emitting  volumes  of  steam, 
and  the  soil  being  of  red  or  white  ochre,  gives  the  whole  a 
most  extraordinary  appearance ; on  the  lower  side  it  has  an 
outlet  into  the  Tarawera  Lake  there  are  several  islands  in 
it,  some  merely  a few  connected  tufts  of  grass,  but  abound- 
ing in  water  fowl,  ducks,  pukeko,  and  sea  birds,  which 


A VISIT  TO  EOTO  MAH  AN  A. 


465 


appear  to  revel  in  the  warmth  of  their  abode  ; two  of  these 
islands  present  a singular  appearance,  being  composed  of 
mis-shapen  rocks  and  ochreons  hills,  filled  with  boiling 
cauldrons  and  jets  of  vapour,  intermingled  with  manuka 
trees  and  native  huts,  on  reaching  which,  the  stranger 
scarcely  knows  where  to  set  his  foot,  lest  he  should  tread  on 
unsafe  ground,  the  whole  surface  being  heated,  and  over- 
spread with  fragments  of  former  puia. 

When  we  came  to  the  border  of  the  lake,  two  canoes  put 
off  from  one  of  the  islands,  to  convey  us  over ; being  desirous 
of  ascertaining  the  temperature  of  the  water,  I kept  my  hand 
in  it  whilst  crossing,  and  found  that  it  varied  from  90°  Fah. 
to  almost  boiling ; the  difference  in  places  may  be  attributed 
to  the  innumerable  boiling  springs  at  the  bottom  of  the  lake, 
the  existence  of  which  was  detected  on  the  surface,  by  their 
bubbling  up  and  noise ; the  lake  appears  to  be  of  great  depth, 
and  the  water  had  no  peculiar  flavour. 

On  reaching  the  island,  we  were  received  by  the  native^ 
with  a loud  welcome ; and  after  a short  stay,  we  went,  during 
the  culinary  operations  of  our  hosts,  to  examine  one  of  the 
puia,  or  hot  springs,  in  the  vicinity,  and  a more  remarkable 
place  I never  saw ; it  had  the  appearance  of  an  immense 
flight  of  white  marble  stairs,  each  step  being  from  one  to 
three  feet  in  height,  formed  by  a silicious  deposit  of  the 
waters ; in  some  places  of  a beautiful  pale  pink  color,  over 
which  about  two  inches  of  warm  water  fell.  I ascended  this 
magnificent  and  unequalled  staircase,  several  parts  of  which 
were  so  slippery,  that  I had  some  difficulty  in  keeping  my 
footing ; one  of  the  steps  presented  merely  a rim  externally, 
and  formed  a basin,  about  four  feet  in  depth,  of  beautifully 
clear  water,  having  a greenish  hue,  like  that  of  the  lake  over 
which  we  had  passed ; neither  of  us  could  resist  the  tempt- 
ing luxury  of  the  bath  which  was  before  us  ; we  found  the 
temperature  nearly  a 100°,  although  it  varied  in  each  of 
the  three  compartments  into  which  it  was  divided;  after- 
wards, I ascended  to  the  summit  of  the  staircase,  where  there 
was  a large  level  flat,  the  centre  not  being  visible  at  first 
on  account  of  the  volume  of  steam  which  issued  from  it  ; 

H H 


466 


A VISIT  TO  ROTO  MAH  ANA. 


the  surface  cracked  under  the  feet  like  thin  ice,  but  being 
formed  of  successive  laminae,  was  firm  ; as  I advanced,  I 
discovered  that  the  centre  was  occupied  by  an  immense  gulf 
of  hot  water,  of  a very  fine  pale  blue,  so  remarkably  clear 
that,  although  the  bottom  could  not  be  discerned,  it  was 
evidently  of  great  depth  ; having  cautiously  approached  the 
edge  which  over-arched  this  awful  abyss,  and  looking  down, 
I beheld  a large  rock  of  a pure  white  substance  rising  from 
the  vast  profound  to  the  surface,  which  formed  a beautiful 
contrast  with  the  azure  water ; a tree  also  which  had  fallen 
in  was  petrified,  and  added  to  the  scene,  but  I found  the 
pavement  I was  standing  upon  was  stretched  over  the  boiling 
abyss,  I could  see  far  under  the  opposite  side,  which  imparted 
a very  unpleasant  feeling  of  danger ; upon  one  portion  of  the 
pavement,  over  which  the  water  flowed,  a thin  deposit  of 
sulphur  was  left,  which  tinged  it  with  a bright  yellow  ; some 
of  the  steps  were  of  a rose  tint,  and  others  of  pure  white, 
which  increased  the  general  effect ; numbers  of  petrified 
manuka  seeds  were  scattered  about  in  every  direction  ; the 
height  of  the  flight  of  steps  which  I have  described  might 
be  sixty  feet ; the  name  of  the  boiling  spring  is  “ Tukupua- 
rangi or  the  Cloudy  Atmosphere,  from  its  always  being 
shrouded  in  vapour  ; the  surrounding  hills  were  covered  with 
dark  green  fern,  which  set  off  this  wonderful  work  of  nature 
to  greater  advantage ; so  large  a number  of  boiling  springs 
in  so  small  a space,  I never  beheld ; indeed,  I could  distinctly 
hear  the  noise  of  several  at  the  bottom  of  the  lake,  and  others 
boiling  up  furiously  from  their  subterraneous  receptacles,  all 
which  conveyed  to  the  mind  a feeling  of  awe  and  insecurity ; 
it  is  not  without  some  hesitation  that  the  visitor  treads  the 
ground,  fearing  at  each  step  lest  the  crust  should  give  way 
and  plunge  him  into  the  hidden  depths  below. 

The  sun  had  set  when  we  returned  to  the  island,  and 
finding  that  our  natives  had  gone  on  to  Piripai  we  followed 
by  canoe,  gliding  amongst  islands  covered  with  rushes,  and 
every  instant  starting  the  wild  fowl  from  their  warm  retreats ; 
we  landed  in  a retired  nook  shaded  with  trees,  and  after 
securing  the  canoe  walked  to  the  village,  which  is  seated 


A VISIT  TO  ROTO  MAHANA. 


467 


on  Tarawera  Lake,,  where  we  received  a cordial  welcome. 
Immediately  opposite,  there  is  a lofty  mountain  which  the 
natives  formerly  regarded  as  sacred,  from  the  idea  that  it 
was  the  abode  of  spirits ; they  said,  although  many  persons 
had  attempted  to  ascend  it,  no  one  ever  succeeded  in  reach- 
ing the  top ; for  the  higher  they  climbed,  the  higher  also 
grew  the  mountain ; the  teacher  of  the  village  is  a “ tuwenua” 
a kind  of  leper,  whose  toes  and  fingers  seem  to  be  wearing 
away  with  dry  ulcerous-looking  sores,  his  skin  being  quite 
horny;  there  were  two  other  lepers  there,  which,  as  the 
disease  is  uncommon,  I looked  upon  as  a remarkable  oc- 
currence, especially  in  so  small  a place ; probably  the  hot 
sulphureous  springs  may  have  something  to  do  with  it ; the 
whole  of  the  front  teeth  of  these  people  are  either  much 
decayed,  or  quite  yellow  and  unsightly,  which  may  be  attri- 
buted to  constantly  eating  food  cooked  in  the  boiling  springs ; 
the  night  which  we  passed  was  so  extremely  cold  that  I could 
scarcely  sleep ; this  appeared  singular  as  the  pa  is  surrounded 
by  hot  springs,  and  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  their 
proximity,  where  hundreds  of  them  are  sending  up  their 
clouds  of  steam  is,  that  it  would  materially  heighten  the 
temperature,  and  this  supposition  would  be  strengthened  by 
the  circumstance  that  a large  and  deep  lake  of  warm  water 
more  than  a mile  in  length  is  in  the  immediate  vicinity ; 
but  such  was  not  the  case,  for  although  the  water  was  warm, 
the  air  one  foot  above  was  very  cold. 

The  next  morning  I arose  early  and  accompanied  by  my 
companion,  paid  a visit  to  the  largest  boiling  spring,  “ Te 
Tarrata At  the  first  view  its  appearance  is  that  of  an  im- 
mense flight  of  steps,  of  a circular  form,  with  water  flowing 
over  them,  which  seemed  to  freeze  as  it  fell,  assuming  the 
color  of  snow  : the  water  here  is  of  a different  character  to 
that  of  the  Tukupuarangi,  being  of  a bluish  milky  hue,  and 
having  a very  soft  and  slightly  saline  flavour : the  change  in 
its  temperature  I found  very  striking,  for  in  some  parts 
it  was  quite  cold,  while  in  others  it  was  warm  or  hot;  on 
some  of  the  steps  there  was  a very  slippery  deposit  of  a 
brown  ochreous  conferva,  on  others,  a formation  closely 

h h 2 


468 


A VISIT  TO  ROTO  MAHANA. 


resembling  a kind  of  moss,  slightly  petrified  ; as  I ascended 
I found  the  steps  increase  in  height  and  width,  each  contain- 
ing one  or  more  baths,  some  of  cold  water,  others  of  warm, 
and  some  even  of  both  in  the  same  basin,  in  one  of  the  largest 
my  companion  and  two  or  three  of  the  natives  who  accom- 
panied ns  soon  deposited  themselves ; this  noble  bath  was 
nearly  fifty  feet  in  length,  and  in  parts  too  deep  to  wade 
through  ; as  I wished  to  ascend  the  higher  steps  to  get  a 
view  of  the  boiling  gulf,  I requested  my  companion  to  call 
his  dog  which  was  following  me ; in  going  up  I found  the 
water  almost  too  hot  for  the  naked  feet,  and  therefore  crept 
up  along  the  sides  where  the  manuka  and  fern  were  growing 
luxuriantly,  and,  strange  to  say,  although  overhanging  the 
steamy  water,  it  felt  icy  cold  to  the  feet ; on  reaching  the 
top  I found  the  silicious  deposit  had  formed  a level  pave- 
ment, over  which  one  or  two  inches  of  water,  nearly  boiling, 
flowed  ; beyond  was  a small  pool,  close  to  the  gulf,  which 
occupied  the  centre,  and  sent  forth  volumes  of  vapour,  com- 
pletely concealing  its  form  from  view ; in  the  middle  of  the 
platform  was  a rocky  mound  overhanging  the  chasm,  where 
those  who  reached  it  obtained  a nearer  sight  of  the  abyss,  to 
facilitate  which,  a row  of  stepping  stones  had  been  laid  for 
travellers  to  pass  over ; as  I was  advancing  along  them,  the 
dog,  which  had  broken  away  from  its  master,  ran  past  me, 
and  finding  the  water  scald  his  feet,  he  bounded  on  with  a 
yell  of  pain,  and,  in  an  instant,  plunged  into  the  pool  of  hot 
water ; the  poor  animal  made  a vain  attempt  to  escape, 
it  rolled  over,  and  in  an  instant  was  dead,  and  sank  to  the 
bottom ; its  agonizing  struggles  quite  unnerved  me,  it  was 
one  of  the  most  distressing  and  painful  sights  I ever  wit- 
nessed; I could  render  no  aid,  and  knew  if  I had  rescued 
the  poor  creature,  its  torments  would  only  have  been  pro- 
longed ; after  seeing  it  at  the  bottom  of  the  pool  which  had 
thus  suddenly  become  its  grave,  I retraced  my  steps  ; after- 
wards, learned  that  two  poor  children  met  a similar  end 
some  few  years  back  in  a neighbouring  puia  ; the  elder  one, 
who  was  carrying  an  infant,  went  to  take  out  a basket  of 
potatoes  which  had  been  cooking  in  it ; when,  standing  on 


A VISIT  TO  ROTO  MAH  ANA.  * 


469 


the  verge,  the  infant  struggled  in  its  bearer’s  arms,  and  it  is 
supposed,  fell  in ; the  other,  without  hesitation,  jumped  in 
to  its  rescue.  The  place  has  ever  since  been  “"tapu.” 

These  wonderful  works  of  the  Creator,  while  they  excite 
our  admiration,  cannot  be  looked  upon  without  awe  : it 
is  here  we  see  a portion  of  the  grand  laboratory  of  nature, 
where  the  process  of  resolving  and  renewing  is  constantly 
going  on  ; here  we  see  how  easily  soft  and  impalpable  pow- 
der can  be  cemented  into  solid  stone,  and  the  apparently 
indestructible  rocks  be  either  softened  and  reduced  to  mud, 
or  sublimed  so  as  to  fly  off  in  gas. 

The  number  of  lakes  in  close  proximity  to  each  other, 
forming  a cluster  of  sixteen,  without  including  many  of 
trifling  size,  has  acquired  for  the  whole  the  name  of  “ The 
Lake  District,”  and  probably  there  is  not  a similar  collection 
to  be  found  anywhere  else,  containing  so  many  natural  phe- 
nomena and  varied  points  of  interest  : one  large  lake  being 
filled  with  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  has  gained  the  name  of 
Roto  Kawa,  sour  lake  ; another  having  a volcanic  cone 
beautifully  rising  up  in  its  centre,  and  each  possessing  its 
own  characteristic  feature  to  distinguish  it  from  the  others  ; 
so  that,  as  a whole,  it  must  soon  become  a great  attraction, 
not  only  to  those  living  in  New  Zealand,  but  likewise  in 
other  lands. 


COOKING  IN  A BOILING  SPRING. 


MITRE  PEAK,  MILFORD  SOUND. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

GENERAL  GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


The  Geology  of  New  Zealand  is  so  closely  connected  with 
that  of  the  southern  hemisphere,  and  it  again  with  the  other 
half  of  our  globe,  that  it  will  not  be  altogether  out  of  place 
to  offer  a few  general  remarks  upon  the  whole,  and  in  doing 
so,  it  will  be  necessary  to  recapitulate  a portion  of  the  preced- 
ing chapter. 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  take  up  a map  of  the  world, 
without  observing  how  wonderfully  several  grand  continental 
portions  of  it  seem  to  dovetail  into  each  other,  and  thus  give 
rise  to  certain  uniform  features  which  encircle  the  entire 
globe.  If  the  eye  follows  the  western  coast  line  of  the  two 
Americas,  which  almost  extend  from  pole  to  pole  with  a grand 
central  curve  to  the  east,  and  then  observes  the  opposite 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


471 


side,  with,  its  great  indentation  forming  the  Gulf  of  Mexico, 
it  will  be  seen  how  perfectly  the  African  coast  line  fits  into 
it,  and  further,  that  the  eastern  side  of  the  same  continent 
running  up  the  Red  Sea,  also  tallies  with  the  other,  which, 
to  say  the  least,  presents  a singular  appearance  of  agree- 
ment, but  when  the  search  is  pursued  and  other  similar  lines 
are  detected,  then  it  will  strike  the  observer  that  they  have 
not  been  produced  by  chance,  but  must  be  attributed  to 
some  cause,  which  equally  acts  on  the  entire  surface  of  our 
globe.  Similar  lines  can  be  traced  on  either  side  of  the 
Australian  continent,  which  may  be  followed  through  Asia ; 
and  another  fragmentary  one  is  to  be  found  running  to  the 
north,  along  the  western  coast  of  New  Zealand,  by  New 
Caledonia,  the  Philippines,  Japan,  and  Kamschatka,  and  to 
the  south  by  the  Auckland,  Campbells,  and  Macquarie  Isles, 
to  Mount  Erebus ; and  even  another  line  might  yet  be  seen 
beyond  this,  so  that  fully  eight  similar  ones  may  be  made  out. 
These  then  may  be  regarded  as  so  many  continental  waves 
of  upheavements  with  a central  curve,  which  probably  is  to 
be  attributed  to  the  swelling  out  at  the  equator,  and  the 
whole  to  the  earth's  diurnal  revolution. 

Of  these  lines,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  there  are  several 
peculiar  features  belonging  to  them  : — ■ 

1.  In  them  are  found  the  loftiest  mountain  ranges  and 
peaks  of  our  planet,  which  form  the  crests  of  those  land- waves. 

2.  The  ocean  attains  its  greatest  depth  on  their  western 
sides,  from  which  they  abruptly  rise,  and  gradually  slope  to 
the  eastern,  as  in  the  Prairies  and  Pampas  of  America,  so 
that  the  greatest  depression  is  at  the  eastern  termination  of 
their  plane  of  upheavement. 

3.  That  all  those  lines  are  auriferous,  abounding  in  metals 
and  precious  stones.  Africa  has  always  been  remarkable 
as  a grand  gold  field,  so  that  a large  portion  of  its  shores 
acquired  the  name  of  “ The  Gold  Coast."  Spain,  in  former 
days,  supplied  the  world  with  the  precious  metal,  and  the 
British  Isles  are  well  known  to  be  auriferous.  Of  the 
American,  Australian,  and  New  Zealand  lines,  nothing  need 
be  said,  as  they  are  the  grand  gold  fields  of  the  present  day, 


472 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


and  are  now  attracting  multitudes  from  every  land  to  dig 
tlie  precious  ore.* 

4.  Nearly  all  the  active  known  volcanoes  are  found  in 
them,  which,  being  the  grand  fissures  of  the  earth's  crust, 
account  for  their  presence ; whatever  may  be  the  evils 
occasioned  by  them,  they  are  more  than  counterbalanced  by 
the  benefits  they  confer,  as  being  the  grand  safety-valves  of 
the  globe ; when  in  activity  there  are  seldom  any  bad  earth- 
quakes, but  when  in  a state  of  quiescence,  then  severe  shocks 
are  more  likely  to  occur. 

5.  Volcanic  action  is  the  strongest  and  most  generally 
felt  in  those  lines,  and  is  the  grand  cause  of  the  elevations 
and  depressions  of  the  earth's  crust. 

6.  In  the  different  epochs  of  the  earth's  early  history,  and 
during  the  grand  convulsions  which  have  shattered  its  crust, 
destroyed  animal  and  vegetable  life  on  its  surface,  those  lines 
have  been  the  great  means  of  preserving  portions  of  former 
existences  from  extinction.  It  has  chiefly  been  where  they 
have  the  least  elevation  that  those  ancient  forms  have  been 
lost,  whilst  the  highest  mountain  ranges  retained  large  por- 
tions of  each  pre-existing  fauna  and  flora. 

The  great  length  and  elevation  of  the  Andes  with  the 
Cordilleras,  reaching  from  the  polar  regions  of  the  north, 
render  them  the  most  remarkable  mountain  ranges  in  the 
world,  their  lofty  peaks  being  only  exceeded  by  those  of  the 
Himalaya  ; those  in  New  Zealand  extend  through  the  entire 
length  of  the  Middle  Island,  and  a large  portion  of  the 
other ; they  may  be  traced  from  Mounts  Erebus  and  Terror 
at  the  south  pole,  to  the  eastern  termination  of  Asia  by  the 
peninsular  of  Kamschatka. 

The  Australian  line  has  the  blue  mountains  extending 
through  that  insular  continent,  reaching  to  Tasmania  in 

* A return  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  gold  exported  from  New  Zealand, 
from  the  ist  April  1857  to  31st  March  1864  : — 

Auckland  - - 6,905  ozs.,  value  - £ 21,844 

Nelson  - - ^ 63,275  ,,  ,,  - 245,191 

Dunedin  and  Bluff  r>33 653  ,,  ,,  - 5,160,156 

Since  these  returns,  the  Auckland  lines  have  become  more  prolific  than  all  the 

rest  put  together. 


GEOLOGICAL  EEATUEES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


473 


the  south,  and  continued  by  Java  and  Sumatra  through 
central  Asia ; these  rise  abruptly  from  the  west,  where  the 
sea  attains  its  greatest  depth  ; on  the  western  side  of 
America  it  has  been  found  to  reach  five  miles,  and  on  those 
of  Africa  upwards  of  three,  whilst  the  North  Atlantic  is  still 
deeper,  gradually  shoaling  to  the  eastern  shores  of  America. 

The  New  Zealand  mountain  range  seems  to  rise  abruptly 
from  an  immense  depth,  even  from  their  almost  perpen- 
dicular bases ; the  extended  plains  on  the  eastern  sides  of 
these  lines  are  as  remarkable  as  the  absence  of  them  on  the 
western ; these  Alps,  standing  out  so  abruptly  from  the 
ocean,  appear  only  as  the  tops  of  a far  higher  range  now 
partly  submerged  ; their  present  height  seems  to  have  once 
been  entirely  clothed  with  glaciers,  since  even  to  the  very 
sea  level  their  grooving  effects  in  former  times  are  distinctly 
marked  on  their  precipitous  sides,  far  below  the  snow  line  of 
the  present  day. 

In  these  grand  lines  all  the  gold  fields  are  found.  Hum- 
bolt  seems,  in  some  respects,  to  have  entertained  a similar 
view,  stating  that,  “ Gold  is  constant  in  Meridional  ranges 
of  the  Paleozoic  and  Metamorphic  formation.”  Wherever 
surface  gold  is  found,  it  seems  to  indicate  that  such  parts 
have  been  exempted  from  convulsions,  or  at  any  rate  pre- 
served their  primitive  conditions,  as  in  parts  of  Australia, 
America,  Africa,  and  New  Zealand. 

It  is  also  in  these  lines  that  nearly  all  the  active  volcanoes 
are  found,  and  where  the  chief  volcanic  disturbances  occur. 
There  are  three  active  volcanoes  in  the  Aleutian  Archipelago, 
adjoining  the  American  coast,  and  three  more  commencing 
as  far  north  as  Mount  St.  Elias ; in  Mexico  there  are  five  ; in 
Guatimala  and  Nicaragua  nineteen,  within  the  short  distance 
of  five  degrees ; in  Quito  and  Popayan  eleven ; in  the  province 
of  Las  Pastos  three ; in  Peru  four,  and  in  Chili  seven ; thus, 
on  the  western  coast  line  of  this  continent,  the  longest  in 
the  world,  there  are  as  many  as  fifty-five  active  volcanoes. 
On  the  eastern  American  line,  which  is  chiefly  confined  to 
the  Antilles,  there  are  nine,  with  two  on  the  mainland ; in 
the  grand  Pacific  Ocean,  two  of  these  volcanic  lines  may 


474 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


be  traced,  one  commencing  with  the  north-eastern  termina- 
tion of  Asia,  and  ending  with  Mount  Erebus  ; the  peninsula 
of  Kamschatka  contains  ten;  the  Kurile  Isles  four;  Japan 
nine  ; Lieuchien  one  ; the  Philippines  six  ; Barren  Isle  one ; 
Sulphur  Isle  another  ; the  Ladrones  ten ; New  Guinea  three ; 
the  New  Hebrides  four  j the  Friendly  Isles  one  ; the  Sunday 
Isles  one  ; New  Zealand  fully  half-a-dozen,  with  two  more 
active  than  the  rest ; and  this  line  terminates  with  Mount 
Erebus  12,000  feet  high,  which  is  ever  emitting  flames,  as  it 
commenced  with  Kliuchevsk,  in  Kamschatka,  16,512  feet  in 
height ; in  this  line  there  are  as  many  as  fifty-eight  volcanoes, 
but  this  is  far  from  being  a perfect  list,  as  our  geographical 
knowledge  of  the  islands  between  Japan  and  the  Friendly 
Isles  is  extremely  defective. 

Another  fragmentary  line  may  be  traced  from  Mount 
Tanaga  in  the  Aleutian  Archipelago  to  the  Sandwich  Islands, 
in  which  are  three  volcanoes  : in  the  Society  Isles  and 
Marquesas  two,  and  the  Gallipagos  one,  in  all  seven. 

The  Australian  line  commences  with  the  Tourfan,  in  lat. 
43°  30'  N.  and  Ion.  87°  11'  E. ; two  in  the  Thian-shan 
chain  ; in  Sumatra  four ; Java  fourteen,  and  the  neighbour- 
ing isles  ten,  of  which  is  Tomboro  in  Sumbava  Island, 
whose  detonations  have  been  heard  at  the  amazing  distance 
of  three  hundred  leagues  ; excepting  Maunaloa  in  the  Sand- 
wich Isles,  this  is  perhaps  the  most  powerful  in  the  world. 
The  Molucca  and  neighbouring  isles  contain  ten  more,  making 
a total  of  about  forty  known  volcanoes,  but  as  our  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Indian  seas  is  also  very  imperfect,  the  number 
may  probably  be  much  larger. 

The  western  Asiatic  line  has  Demavend,  the  culminating 
point  of  the  Elbour's  chain,  between  the  Caspian  Sea  and 
Plains  of  Persia,  21,000  feet  high.  The  Mauritius  has 
its  three  Salasses,  and  St.  Paul's,  The  East  African  line 
contains  Etna,  Vesuvius,  Stromboli,  and  several  in  the 
Grecian  Archipelago,  the  Gibbel-Teir  in  the  Red  Sea,  and 
one  in  Madagascar. 

The  European  and  West  African  line  commences  with 
Jean  Mayen,  and  eight  in  Iceland ; one  in  the  Azores  ; two 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GOLBE, 


475 


in  the  Cape  de  Verd ; one  in  the  Isle  of  Ascension,  and 
another  in  Sandwich  Land.  This  is  but  an  imperfect  list, 
probably  there  are  many  more  than  those  enumerated  ; 
Madagascar  is  scarcely  known,  and  even  the  coast  line  of 
Papua  or  New  Guinea  is  not  yet  laid  down.  Volcanic  action, 
as  well  as  volcanoes,  are  chiefly  confined  to  those  lines. 

In  1822,  the  coast  near  Valparaiso  was  elevated  several 
feet : passing  over  the  almost  constant  earthquakes  occurring 
along  the  western  coasts  of  the  Americas,  and  the  elevating 
and  depressing  even  of  mountains,  the  years  1867  and  1868 
have  evidenced  that  those  disturbances  have  not  ceased  or 
diminished  in  their  intensity  ; the  calamities  which  befel  the 
ill-fated  inhabitants  of  Arica  and  Iquiqui,  as  well  as  on  the 
East  American  line,  are  yet  fresh  in  the  memory.  In  past  days 
Kingston  in  Jamaica  was  submerged,  and  in  the  present, 
St.  Thomas  and  Tortola  have  been  severely  visited  ; in  fact, 
every  line  enumerated  has,  during  the  last  year,  been  sub- 
jected to  earthquakes  of  greater  or  less  intensity ; in  the 
European  line  Lisbon  was  destroyed  during  the  last  century ; 
in  Britain  several  shocks  were  felt  during  the  past  year. 
The  coast  of  Sweden  is  gradually  rising,  whilst  probably 
that  of  Norway,  the  other  end  of  the  plane,  is  subsiding; 
within  the  last  two  or  three  years  a submarine  volcano  broke 
out  in  the  ocean  amongst  the  Azores. 

In  the  East  African  line,  a submarine  volcano  appeared 
in  the  Grecian  Archipelago.  Etna,  Vesuvius,  and  Stromboli, 
have  been  unusually  active,  and  earthquakes  have  occurred 
in  Iceland,  and  other  parts.  In  Asia,  Antioch  has  always 
been  a severe  sufferer  from  such  disturbances.  In  the 
Australian  line,  the  outbreaks  of  Sumbaya  and  the  fearful 
destruction  of  life,  are  well  remembered.  Volcanic  action 
is  all  but  constant  amongst  the  Indian  Isles.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  New  Zealand,  in  1843,  1848,  1855,  and 
1868,  the  disturbances  were  very  great;  so  also  of  the 
Philippines,  and  especially  of  Japan,  and  Maunaloa  or  Ki- 
laua,  the  activity  of  the  latter  within  the  last  year  has 
been  most  wonderful,  its  lava  streams  have  run  into  the  sea, 
and  formed  a promontory  nearly  a mile  in  length ; in  other 


476 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


parts  great  depressions  of  the  island  have  taken  place.  It 
also  appears  that  this  internal  power  has  been  displayed 
through  the  entire  length  of  each  line,  with  greater  or  less 
intensity  in  certain  parts,  as  in  the  past  year,  when  every 
portion  of  the  globe  seems  to  have  shared  those  internal 
convulsions  ; whilst  a tidal  wave  was  sweeping  over  much  of 
the  eartlPs  surface,  an  internal  one  was  apparently  at  the 
same  time  rolling  round  the  central  ocean,  and  by  increased 
pressure  communicating  disturbance  to  each  of  those  lines, 
violent  earthquakes  were  shaking  the  islands  of  the  Pacific, 
and  the  Peruvian  coast  sending  huge  waves  northwards  to  the 
coast  of  California,  at  the  very  same  time  (1 5th  August  1867), 
there  was  an  earthquake  at  Gibraltar,  recorded  in  the  local 
paper  of  that  date.  The  tidal  wave  reached  the  Chatham 
Isles  on  the  same  day,  between  1 and  2 a.m.,  flowing  inland 
four  miles,  and  doing  great  damage  ; it  arrived  on  the 
New  Zealand  coast  at  3 or  4 a.m.,  but  at  Sydney  it  was 
felt  at  2.30  a.m.,  which  is  very  remarkable,  and  seems  to 
prove  that  it  could  not  be  the  same  Wave  as  that  which 
visited  the  Chatham  Isles,  but  must  have  been  another  com- 
mencing from  the  west  coast  of  New  Zealand. 

At  Hilo,  in  the  Sandwich  Isles,  it  occurred  on  the  14th, 
15th,  and  16th  August,  and  at  San  Pedro,  California,  on 
the  15th;  if  it  were  the  same  wave  which  left  the  American 
shore  that  reached  the  Chatham  Isles  it  was  only  fifteen  and 
a half  hours  in  traversing  6,300  geographical  miles,  and  its 
velocity  would  be  400  miles  an  hour ; one  great  proof  that  it 
was  not,  is  that  there  is  no  account  of  any  of  the  low  atolls 
or  coral  isles,  which  are  far  less  elevated  than  the  Chatham 
Isles,  having  been  submerged,  which  must  have  been  the 
case  had  it  been  so ; the  probability  is  that  there  were  several 
waves,  and  not  one  continuous  one,  each  volcanic  line  having 
its  separate  one. 

These  outbreaks  of  volcanic  power  seem  to  have  a close 
connection  with  atmospheric  disturbance  by  destroying  the 
equilibrium  between  internal  and  external  pressure ; thus, 
whenever  a hurricane  passes  over  one  of  these  longitudinal 
fissures  of  the  globe  an  earthquake  is  almost  sure  to  be  the 
result. 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


477 


Another  remark  may  be  made  of  these  continental  lines, 
which  is,  that  they  are  seldom  at  rest,  especially  in  tropical 
regions,  where  the  source  of  disturbance  arising  from  hurri- 
canes, tornadoes,  typhoons,  or  whatever  they  may  be  called,  is 
the  most  frequent  and  powerful ; perhaps  the  grand  primary 
cause  may  be  referred  to  the  state  of  the  ether  our  planet 
rolls  through,  which  is  perceived  by  the  constant  variation  of 
the  barometer  to  prove  that  infinitely  more  is  to  be  attributed 
to  it  than  is  supposed,  as  it  is  continually  changing  in  its 
character  as  we  pass  through  it,  and  that  atmospheric  dis- 
turbance is  to  be  regarded  as  the  real  cause  of  earthquakes 
seems  to  be  inferred  from  Scripture,  where  it  is  alluded  to  as 
preceding  a shock  (see  Exodus  xix.  16, 18  ; 1 Kings  xix.  11  ; 
Joel  iii.  15,  16;  Haggai  ii.  6). 

The  depressions  and  elevations  which  are  constantly  oc- 
curring in  those  lines  are  therefore  correspondingly  greater 
in  the  hottest  regions.  The  Andes  appear  to  be  still  rising, 
but  whilst  the  range  of  New  Zealand  alps  may  be  sinking, 
the  country  in  general  is  being  elevated  ; large  portions  of 
Japan  and  the  Philippines  have  also  subsided ; the  Maories 
have  traditions  of  islands  having  been  submerged.  Williams 
likewise  records  that  the  natives  of  Rarotonga  state  their 
island  was  formerly  united  to  Raiatea,  a distance  of  fully  six 
hundred  miles,  when  the  intervening  land  suddenly  sank 
down,  leaving  only  the  small  isles,  which  are  now  seen ; 
in  fact,  if  credence  is  to  be  given  to  such  accounts,  a 
large  portion  of  a southern  continent  must  have  disappeared. 
That  there  was  one  seems  to  be  proved  by  the  remnants 
of  one  common  flora  being*  found  through  the  length  and 
breadth  of  the  isles  of  that  vast  ocean,  and  this  accounts  for 
the  fragmentary  character  of  the  line,  its  having  been  broken 
up  into  small  islands,  the  peaks  of  submerged  ravages ; 
indeed  the  elevation  of  these  lines  seems  to  point  out  such 
subsidence,  whatever  may  be  the  height  of  one  end  of 
the  plane,  which  is  more  immediately  acted  upon  by  the  up- 
heaving power  beneath,  the  depression  at  the  other  will 
correspond,  if  therefore  as  is  supposed,  the  mountain  range 
of  New  Zealand  was  once  far  more  elevated  than  it  is  now, 


478 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


tlie  result  would  be  the  depression  of  a large  portion  of  that 
southern  continent,  but  as  it  is  said  the  New  Zealand  alps 
are  now  sinking,*  the  effect  will  be  the  upheaving  of  a por- 
tion of  those  lands  formerly  overwhelmed,  and  this  appears 
to  be  actually  the  case ; the  great  plains  at  the  eastern  base 
of  that  range  being  one  grand  shingle  bed,  and  even  since 
the  European  has  occupied  the  island,  a singular  instance  in 
corroboration  of  this  has  occurred.  The  natives,  when  they 
sold  the  Middle  Island,  amongst  other  reserves  refused  to 
part  with  the  lakes  and  rivers;  one  of  the  former,  Lake 
Ellesmere,  a large  expanse  of  water,  has  within  the  last  few 
years,  become  greatly  reduced  in  size  from  the  rising  of 
the  land,  the  natives  observing  this  at  once  went  on  the 
desiccated  land,  began  to  cultivate  it,  and  when  ordered  off 
refused  to  go,  stating  they  had  never  sold  the  lakes. 

The  same  geological  changes  seem  to  be  going  on  in 
North  America,  where  the  mountain  ranges  are  of  much 
less  elevation  than  those  of  South  America,  the  grand  sa- 
line lakes,  deserts,  and  prairies,  seem  to  have  once  been 
inland  seas,  but  are  now  gradually  drying  up,  and  before 
long  will  be  available  for  man’s  occupation.  So  with  the 
mountain  ranges  of  Norway,  which  also  appears  to  be  slowly 
subsiding,  whilst  the  eastern  base  is  likewise  rising,  thus 
Sweden  is  being  elevated,  and  the  Baltic  becoming  shoaler. 

Are  then  the  lands  of  the  Southern  Hemisphere  rising  or 
subsiding  ? As  in  general  coral  reefs  have  risen,  for  it  is 
thus  the  atolls  have  been  formed,  so  also  the  barrier  reefs 
of  Australia  ; when  the  coral  insect  ceased  its  labours,  then 
another  power  came  into  play,  and  elevated  them  above 
the  highest  water  mark  ; no  doubt  some  of  the  islands 
have  subsided  and  others  been  submerged  ; ruins  of  build- 
ings, and  even  towers,  are  said  to  be  seen  beneath  the  sea 
level.  The  great  depression  likewise  of  the  central  plains 
of  Australia  is  also  adduced,  all  these  instances  seem  to 
support  the  theory  of  Sir  J.  Herschel,  that  the  sea  bottom 
of  the  Pacific  is  sinking  from  the  weight  of  superimposed 
matter,  which  is  constantly  being  increased  by  the  debris  of 

* Dr.  Hector,  the  Government  Geeologist  of  New  Zealand. 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


479 


surrounding  lands  and  the  labour  of  the  coral  insects.  If, 
however,  the  theory  broached  of  mountain  ranges  gradually 
subsiding  be  correct,  and  that  by  volcanic  agency,  lands 
are  at  the  same  time  elevated  or  depressed  in  planes, 
then  wherever  there  is  a subsidence  at  the  western  end, 
there  will  be  a corresponding  elevation  at  the  eastern  with 
whatever  accumulations  may  have  been  formed  upon  it ; 
the  weight  of  superimposed  accumulations  is  as  nothing 
compared  with  the  upheaving  power  below.  This  seems  to 
be  proved  by  the  central  plains  of  Australia,  which  at  no 
distant  period  were  inland  seas,  they  have  arisen  as  the 
western  ranges  sank,  and,  doubtless,  will  still  continue  to  do 
so,  this  is  also  borne  out  by  the  upheaving  of  coral  reefs. 

In  1855  several  portions  of  Hew  Zealand  were  elevated, 
but  others  correspondingly  sunk,  this  was  the  case  in  Queen 
Charlotte's  sound,  and  in  the  Wairau  valley,  these  planes  of 
elevation  and  depression,  however,  were  of  small  extent. 
But  the  grand  Hew  Zealand  mountain  range  appears  to  be 
sinking,  this,  therefore,  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
South  Pacific  is  rising. 

It  may  likewise  be  said  that  all  elevations  of  land  are 
unnatural,  according  to  the  constitution  of  our  globe ; that  the 
disproportion  of  pressure  and  resistance  arises  from  foreign 
causes  acting  on  the  atmospheric  ocean,  and  destroying 
its  just  resistance  to  that  internal  pressure,  that  it  is  agree- 
able with  the  law  of  nature  to  try  and  restore  what  is  more 
consonant  with  its  true  system,  thus  it  is  to  be  observed, 
although  during  one  period  internal  powers  may  cause  the 
elevation  of  lands  by  the  aid  of  the  earth's  diurnal  motion, 
and  the  disarrangement  of  atmospheric  pressure,  still,  when 
those  elevations  have  attained  their  maximum,  then  the 
natural  law  would  tend  to  a gradual  return  to  original  con- 
ditions. 

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  feature  of  these  mountain 
lines  is  their  being  made  the  means  of  preserving  the  animal 
and  vegetable  life  of  that  epoch  to  which  they  belong,  and 
wherever  those  lines  have  been  broken  up  into  islands  they 
have  retained  their  ancient  conditions  unmixed  with  later 


480 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


organisms,  and,  therefore,  present  deeply  interesting  pic- 
tures of  the  globe’s  former  state  in  some  of  the  long  past 
periods  of  its  history.  The  more  ancient  the  mountain 
ranges  the  more  interesting  the  zoology  and  flora  preserved, 
hence,  in  New  Zealand  the  state  of  the  carboniferous  age  of 
the  world,  with  its  peculiar  flora  and  wingless  birds,  is  still 
to  be  seen ; and  in  Australia  that  of  another  epoch,  with  its 
marsupials,  thus,  those  lone  islands  of  the  ocean  are  far  more 
interesting  monuments  of  antiquity  than  even  the  pyramids 
of  Egypt,  or  any  of  the  oldest  works  of  man,  not  only  on 
account  of  infinitely  greater  age,  but  the  many  specimens 
they  preserve  of  remote  times,  in  fact,  they  are  living 
museums  of  the  age  to  which  they  belong. 

It  is,  however,  to  be  noticed,  that  whilst  some  of  the 
grandest  mountain  ranges  have  a general  direction  from  the 
north  to  the  south,  there  are  others  which  run  from  east 
to  west,  and  these  are  sufficiently  distinct  to  warrant  the 
supposition  that  there  were  other  parallel  lines  over  the 
earth’s  surface  at  some  more  remote  period,  as  clearly 
marked  as  those  are  now  in  the  contrary  direction.  These 
may  be  still  traced,  although  many  portions  have  been 
broken  in  upon  by  later  elevations.  Thus  in  North  America 
the  Allegany  mountains  run  from  west  to  east,  and  by  the 
Bermudas  and  Azores  are  continued  in  Europe  by  the  Pyre- 
nees, the  .Alps,  and  Carpathians;  in  Asia  by  the  Caucasian, 
Altai  and  Stannovoi  ranges,  which  extend  quite  across  that 
continent,  and  by  the  Aleutian  Archipelago  join  the  American 
line. 

Another  may  be  equally  well  traced,  which  commences 
with  the  south-eastern  portion  of  Mexico,  then  runs  through 
Cuba,  St.  Domingo,  Porto-rico,  the  Cape  de  Verd  Islands, 
then  across  Africa  by  the  Kong  mountains,  and  those  of  the 
moon  to  the  south  coast  of  Arabia,  Persia,  Himalaya  and 
Thibetian  mountains,  to  the  eastern  coast  of  China,  and 
then  by  the  Corea,  Sandwich  Isles,  and  the  Galapagos,  join 
America. 

The  remains  of  similar  continental  waves  of  upheavement 
are  also  perceptible  in  the  Spanish  Peninsula,  which  is  in- 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


481 


tersected  by  several  ranges  running  in  the  same  direction, 
and  in  sailing  parallel  to  the  African  and  Spanish  coasts  the 
observer  cannot  help  seeing  as  he  passes  the  latitude  of 
each  range  that  the  deep  blue  of  the  ocean  is  changed  to  a 
dark  green,  clearly  marking  the  submerged  mountain  lines 
he  is  sailing  over ; so  when  passing  the  Devil’s  Bock,  a 
similar  change  of  color  takes  place,  and,  doubtless,  another 
submerged  mountain  chain  connects  it  with  the  three  Chim- 
nies.  Job’s  Eock,  and  Newfoundland.  The  same  subject 
might  be  continued  to  show  that  Australia  was  then  connected 
with  Newr  Zealand,  and  by  the  peninsula  of  Akaroa  with  the 
Chatham  Isles,  and  to  the  south  with  the  Auckland  and 
Macquarie  Islands. 

The  relative  position  of  land  and  ocean  has,  doubtless,  in 
many  parts  been  greatly  altered,  and  if  ancient  continental 
lines  of  upheavement  are  still  to  be  discerned,  it  is  equally 
easy  to  trace  the  boundaries  of  ancient  oceans,  which  once 
flowed  parallel  to  those  continents,  as  the  Atlantic  and 
Pacific  do  to  the  present  ones.  First  to  the  Polar  Ocean, 
next  Hudson’s  Bay,  stretching  across  to  the  Baltic,  the 
great  lakes  of  Ladoga  and  Onega,  then  across  Asia  to  the 
sea  of  Ochotsk,  and  Kamschatka,  to  America,  with  its  salt 
lakes  and  prairies ; another  ancient  ocean  takes  in  the 
Mediterranean,  Black,  Caspian,  and  Aral  seas,  with  the 
depressed  desert  plains  of  Africa  and  Asia,  and  the  large 
North  American  lakes ; and  passing  over  the  central  waters 
of  Africa,  with  which  we  are  only  just  becoming  acquainted, 
there  is  the  grand  Southern  Ocean  encircling  the  entire  globe. 
The  pointed  terminations  of  the  southern  continents,  each 
with  an  island  to  the  east  or  south,  the  same  in  the  northern 
hemisphere,  as  that  of  Kamschatka,  California,  and  the 
Floridas.  The  form  also  of  the  western  sides  of  Ireland, 
Scotland,  and  Norway,  all  betoken  the  quarter  from  which 
some  grand  destruction  came,  and  are  to  be  viewed  as  last- 
ing proofs  of  the  earth’s  past  throes. 

If  the  present  continental  lines  of  upheavement  are  in 
any  way  attributable  to  the  revolution  of  our  planet,  it  ap- 
pears equally  probable  that  these  older  lines  owed  their 


482 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


origin  to  the  same  cause,  and  therefore  that  the  change  in 
their  direction  is  to  he  attributed  to  some  grand  convulsion ; 
the  general  opinion  of  geologists  is,  that  the  globe  has 
undergone  several  similar  ones,  which  have  completely 
changed  the  form  and  character  of  its  surface,  destroyed 
large  portions  of  its  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,  and 
given  rise  to  new  orders  in  each  department  of  nature. 

The  law  of  nature  must  be  regarded  as  being  naturally  un- 
changeable, according  to  the  promise  made  to  Noah,  seed  time 
and  harvest,  summer  and  winter,  heat  and  cold,  day  and  night, 
should  go  on  without  interruption,  which,  probably,  would 
have  also  previously  been  the  case  but  for  foreign  causes  of  dis- 
turbance, these,  however  destructive  at  the  time,  the  Almighty 
over-ruled  for  permanent  and  increased  good,  making  each 
the  means  of  introducing  a higher  state  than  the  preceding, 
and  readapting  the  law  of  nature  to  meet  the  altered  state  of 
the  world,  thus,  as  God's  word  has  always  been  in  advance 
of  the  wisdom  of  man,  so  has  his  law  ever  met  the  require- 
ments of  the  natural  world  after  every  alteration  it  has 
undergone,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  when  the  next  great 
convulsion  occurs,  of  which  he  has  forewarned  us. 

One  of  these  grand  changes  of  our  globe  is  alluded  to  in 
Scripture,  which  commences  with  an  account  of  the  condi- 
tion it  was  in  after  one  of  those  grand  cataclysms,  and  its 
gradual  restoration  by  a new  law,  to  a far  higher  state  than 
any  of  the  preceding  ones.  The  disposition,  too,  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, seems  to  have  then  been  altered,  when  volcanic  forces 
appear  to  have  been  so  powerfully  displayed,  as  to  convert 
a large  portion  of  the  aqueous  part  of  the  globe  into  steam, 
which,  instead  of  being  again  condensed  and  returned  to  its 
former  receptacle,  was  raised  by  the  increased  temperature 
of  the  globe  as  a permanent  vapor  floating  over  the  entire 
surface  of  the  atmosphere,  forming  a mass  of  water  larger 
than  even  that  of  the  ocean  beneath,  this  uniformly  spread 
out  at  such  an  elevation  as  a thin  mist,  would  not  hinder  the 
rays  of  the  sun  from  shining  through,  but  would  retain  and 
cause  them  to  circulate  around  the  globe,  and  thus  tend  to 
equalize  its  temperature,  and  render  it  conducive  to  human 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


483 


longevity;  as  there  would,  under  such  circumstances,  be  no 
sudden  transitions  from  heat  ‘to  cold,  so  there  would  be  no 
condensation  of  vapor  to  cause  rain  ; and  Scripture  does  not 
speak  of  any,  but  expressly  states,  the  earth  was  watered  by  a 
mist  which  went  up  from  it.  But  though,  under  these  altered 
circumstances,  there  was  no  rain,  wind,  or  clouds,  and  con- 
sequently no  rainbow,  during  that  period  which  intervened 
from  the  restoration  of  the  globe,  when  it  was  without  form 
and  void,  to  the  time  of  the  deluge,  still  it  by  no  means 
follows  that  there  were  none  of  these  natural  phenomena 
during  the  preceding  states  of  the  earth,  but  when  the 
deluge  took  place,  then  was  the  vapory  ocean  suspended 
above  the  atmosphere,  condensed,  and  precipitated  upon  the 
earth,  thus  terminating  the  peculiar  state  which  prevailed 
during  the  antediluvian  epoch ; then  the  wind  arose,  clouds 
were  formed,  rain  fell,  and  the  phenomenon  of  the  rainbow 
first  appeared  to  Noah,  as  an  assurance  that  there  should 
never  again  be  such  a flood. 

The  vast  increase  of  the  ocean,  so  far  exceeding  the  present 
continental  extent  of  the  world,  and  even  the  existence  of  so 
many  islands  which  are  fragments  of  former  continents,  can 
only  be  accounted  for  by  the  waters  of  the  Deluge  submerging 
by  their  weight,  large  portions  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  in 
their  recoil,  forming  the  pointed  ends  of  so  many  continents. 

A large  portion  of  the  earth’s  surface  must  have  long 
remained  covered  with  the  waters  of  the  Deluge,  and  thus 
the  heat  of  the  earth  been  so  greatly  lowered,  that  a glacial 
climate  would  naturally  be  produced;  several  allusions  to  this 
altered  state  are  made  in  Scripture  : Job,  even  in  those  warm 
regions  where  he  is  supposed  to  have  resided,  speaks  of  the 
“ stream  of  brooks  which  are  blackish  by  reason  of  the  ice, 
and  wherein  the  snow  is  hid”;*  from  other  parts  of  Scripture 
the  same  fact  is  apparent.  All  these  allusions  bear  strong 
testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  Deluge  being  far  more  extended 
than  many  allow,  but  which  universal  tradition  asserts,  and 
general  decrease  of  climatic  heat  proves. f 

* Job.  vi.  16.  See  also  Job  xxxviii.  29,  30  ; i.  11,  12. 

f In  Mexico  there  is  a representation  of  a man  and  woman  in  a kind  of  ark, 

if  2 


484 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


Another  corroboration  is  to  be  found  in  the  statement  that 
animal  food  was  allowed  after  the  Deluge,  and  that  human 
life  became  speedily  shortened,  until  it  fell  to  its  present 
length ; and  further,  that  the  descendants  of  Noah,  journey- 
ing from  the  east  came  to  the  land  of  Shinar.* 

A considerable  period  seems  to  have  elapsed  before  they 
descended  to  the  lower  plains  after  the  Deluge ; this  could 
not  possibly  have  been  from  Mount  Ararat  in  Mesopotamia, 
which,  neither  from  its  elevation  nor  position,  w'ould  agree 
with  the  Scriptural  narrative,  for  those  coming  from  the 
East  could  not  have  reached  those  plains  which  are  justly 
accounted  the  cradle  of  our  race ; it  appears  far  more  likely 
that  Moses,  a resident  in  Egypt,  had  no  idea  of  Mount 
Ararat  in  Mesopotamia ; at  that  period,  the  Egyptians  were 
probably  well  acquainted  with  India,  had  intimate  relations 
with  it,  and  that  the  Prophet  in  his  vision  beheld  the  peaks 
of  the  Himalaya,  the  loftiest  in  the  world,  on  whose  northern 
sides  are  likewise  found  the  earth's  highest  plains,  which 
attain  an  elevation  of  15,000  feet,  and  still  testify  the  fact  by 
the  very  name  they  bear  to  this  day,  of  Thibet,  or  the  ark ; 
and  thence  journeying  from  the  East,  Noah's  descend- 
ants would  reach  the  plains  of  Shinar,  and  part  of  them 
might  enter  China,  which  claims  a like  antiquity  with  the 
oldest  sections  of  the  human  family ; if  this  be  correct,  it  is 
evident  the  drying  up  of  the  earth's  surface  was  gradual,  and 
that  even  now  it  is  still  going  on.  The  Caspian,  the  Sea  of 
Aral,  and  other  large  inland  waters,  are  slowly  decreasing — 
others  have  already  become  desiccated  ; the  deserts  of  Africa, 
Asia,  and  America,  with  its  prairies  and  pampas,  with  the 
central  regions  of  Australia,  may  be  mentioned  as  striking 
proofs  of  the  fact. 

There  is,  however,  a monument  remaining,  which  records 
the  truth  of  the  Deluge  as  plainly  as  if  it  had  been  engraved 

and  a dove  with  a branch  in  its  mouth,  in  one  of  their  hieroglyphical  paintings. 
In  China,  the  memory  of  the  flood  is  preserved  in  one  of  their  hieroglyphics, 
representing  a mouth,  figure  eight,  and  a boat,  which  reads  eight  mouths  in  a 
boat ; and  throughout  Polynesia  an  unmistakeable  allusion  to  it  is  found  in 
their  traditions. 

* Gen.  xi.  2. 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


485 


in  rock,  and  the  letters  filled  in  with  lead.  In  Siberia;  a range 
of  ice  hills  are  found;  covered  with  a thin  stratum  of  soil;  on 
which  there  is  a growth  of  stunted  firs ; those  glacial  hills  have 
been  found  to  contain  the  frozen  bodies  of  animals;  which  are 
still  as  perfect  and  fresh  as  when  they  were  first  entombed  there. 
In  1 790;  the  fall  of  an  ice  cliff  disclosed  a huge  mammoth;  no 
less  than  twenty-one  feet  long;  and  twelve  high;  with  tusks 
of  the  enormous  length  of  ten  feet ; this  vast  body  fell  in  a 
slip  of  the  icy  cliff;  and  became  the  food  of  bears  and  wolves; 
much  of  the  hair;  and  nearly  its  perfect  skeleton;  with  many 
of  the  ligaments  still  adhering;  were  fortunately  preserved 
and  brought  to  the  Museum  of  St.  Petersburg;  where  they 
are  set  up.  Within  the  last  few  years  another  also  has  been 
found  in  the  same  locality;  equally  well  preserved ; Lyell;  in 
his  Address  to  the  British  Association  at  Bath;  alludes  to  it ; 
in  fact;  the  remains  of  those  gigantic  animals  are  so  numerous 
in  the  frozen  wastes  of  the  Tundra;  that  though  the  traders 
have  supplied  the  St.  Petersburg  market  with  ivory  from 
them  for  more  than  a hundred  years;  the  tusks  seem  as 
plentiful  as  ever;  and  they  are  of  such  an  enormous  size  that 
a single  one  will  weigh  300  lbs.;  and  upwards  of  40;000  lbs. 
are  disposed  of  yearly  in  New  Siberia;  this  gives  the  product 
of  one  hundred  mammoths  for  the  traffic  of  a twelvemonth. 
But  as  long  ago  as  the  13th  century;  the  princes  of  the 
barbaric  East  were  wont  to  have  their  thrones  made  of  slabs 
and  pillars  of  that  ivory;  so  that  the  trade  must  have  been 
very  ancient.  Even  now  there  are  places  where  those  tusks 
are  found  piled  up  in  heaps;  as  if  whole  herds  of  mammoths 
had  crowded  together,  and  succumbed  at  the  same  moment 
to  some  terrible  destruction.* 

Nor  are  those  grand  indications  of  former  life  confined  to 
Siberia,  even  Melvill's  Island,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
polar  ocean,  is  likewise  found  to  abound  in  fossil  remains. 
Captain  M’Clure  discovered  on  Banksland,  several  miles 
inland,  remarkable  hills  three  hundred  feet  high,  formed  of 
one  mass  of  timber,  some  of  it  petrified.  On  Prince  Patrick's 
Isle,  in  lat.  76°  15'  N.  and  121°  40'  long.,  Lieutenant  Meecham 

* Mr.  Lumley’s  Report. 


486 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


observed  similar  deposits,  and  adds,  “ From  tbe  perfect  state 
of  tbe  bark  and  tbe  position  of  the  trees,  so  far  from  tbe  sea, 
there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  they  grew  originally  in 
that  country”;  * he  sawed  one  through,  it  appeared  very  close 
grained,  and  so  immensely  heavy  that  he  could  only  carry  a 
very  small  piece  of  it  away ; these  are  very  interesting  facts  ; 
when  those  hills  were  formed,  which  are  three  hundred  feet 
high,  the  water  must  have  stood  fully  that  height  upon  them,  as 
well  as  on  the  main  land  of  Siberia ; whether  drifted  there  or 
deposited  by  icebergs,  it  seems  clear  there  was,  at  any  rate, 
an  elevation  of  fully  three  hundred  feet  of  ocean  greater  than 
there  is  now,  by  which  the  icy  hills  of  Siberia  were  floated, 
and  finally  stranded  as  the  waters  of  that  ocean  retired ; it  is 
evident,  both  from  the  fossil  remains  of  the  mammoth  in 
Britain,  and  those  of  tropical  trees  and  plants,  as  well  as  the 
grooved  hills,  that  the  same  waters  flowed  over  the  British 
Islands,  floated  the  icebergs  which  grooved  its  mountains,  and 
deposited  those  erratic  boulders,  which  still  attest  the  fact. 

This  must  have  been  the  glacial  period  of  which  geologists 
speak  and  it  is  evident  that  it  suddenly  succeeded  a warmer,  if 
not  a tropical  one,  in  those  parts.  It  does  not  seem  probable 
that  it  could  have  been  a gradual  change,  otherwise  those 
huge  mammoths  packed  in  ice,  would  not  have  been  pre- 
served in  such  a perfect  state,  but  would  have  been  more  or 
less  decomposed  when  entombed  ; the  destruction  of  life  and 
the  formation  of  those  icebergs  must  have  been  simultaneous. 

The  glacial  theory  as  now  held,  which  is  supposed  to  have 
totally  destroyed  animal  and  vegetable  life  over  a large 
portion  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  continued  for  such  an 
immense  period,  far  exceeding  the  Bible  or  any  other  chro- 
nology, causing  plants  and  animals  to  forsake  the  frozen 
regions  and  migrate  to  the  equator,  seems  far  more  difficult 
to  account  for,  than  any  discrepancy  which  is  fancied  to  exist 
between  the  pages  of  Scripture  and  those  of  the  book  of 
nature  ; geologists  assume  their  glacial  theory  as  a fact,  but 
assign  no  possible  cause ; Holy  Writ  asserts  the  fact  of  a 

* The  discovery  of  the  N.  W.  passage,  H.  M.  S.  “Investigator,”  Captain 
R.  M’Clure,  page  209. 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


487 


Deluge  and  assigns  a sufficient  cause,  and  Nature  brings 
forth  proofs  that  it  produced  a glacial  period,  and  those 
proofs  no  later  catastrophe  has  removed. 

It  is  now  asserted  that  pre-Adamite  man  was  in  existence 
before  the  glacial  epoch,  and  also  that  many  sections  of  that 
race  are  still  surviving ; it  will  be  extremely  interesting  to 
know,  how  they  managed  to  live  during  that  long  period, 
which  caused  all  other  creatures  to  succumb,  and  even  vege- 
tation itself. 

The  memory  of  the  Deluge  is  everywhere  to  be  found  even 
amongst  the  remotest  sections  of  the  human  family,  and  the 
account  of  it  in  Scripture  is  most  consistent ; the  alteration 
of  a previous  law  of  nature,  by  placing  a large  body  of  water 
continuously  over  the  surface  of  the  atmospheric  ocean,  its 
natural  effect  would  be  the  equalization  of  the  earth's  tem- 
perature, and  rendering  its  climate  conducive  to  longevity, 
also  absence  of  rain,  the  earth  being  watered  by  a mist,  and 
the  condensation  of  that  vapor  by  the  near  approach  of  some 
foreign  body,  figuratively  spoken  of  by  the  windows  of  heaven 
being  Opened,  assign  a simple  but  sufficient  cause  for  the 
Deluge ; the  mode  of  removing  the  waters  by  a wind,  the  in- 
creased size  of  the  ocean,  and  probable  subsidence  of  a grand 
southern  continent,  the  sudden  refrigeration  of  the  earth's 
climate,  human  life  shortened,  animal  food  allowed,  all  agree 
and  unite  in  forming  a consistent  and  truthful  cause  of  that 
change  which  all  acknowledge  has  taken  place,  and  of  which 
Nature  has  preserved  such  convincing  proofs ; nor  does  this 
militate  against  the  fact,  that  in  some  pre-existing  epoch  of 
the  earth,  there  were  clouds,  wind,  and  rain,  it  only  declares 
there  were  none  during  the  antediluvian  period. 

The  fact  of  the  globe  having  been  subjected  to  various 
convulsions,  which  threatened  its  very  existence,  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at.  It  seems  almost  an  impossibility  that  two  vessels 
should  run  foul  of  each  other  in  the  midst  of  the  vast  ocean,  and 
yet  they  not  unfrequently  do  so ; the  wonder  is  that  during  the 
immense  periods  of  the  earth's  existence  more  catastrophes 
have  not  occurred,  when  it  is  considered  how  many  impe- 
diments it  is  liable  to  meet  with  in  its  course,  some  of  which 


488 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


may  be  of  sufficient  power  to  cause  temporary  disturbance 
and  ruin.  The  fact  that  meteoric  bodies  do  fall  on  our  earth 
suggests  the  possibility  of  larger  ones  haying  fallen  or  passed 
sufficiently  near  as  temporarily  to  disarrange  or  even  alter 
its  law  of  revolution. 

The  gradual  retiring  of  tbe  waters  from  the  surface  of  the 
earth  has  led  to  its  improved  temperature ; a large  portion 
of  the  great  desert  of  Sahara  is  stated  to  be  below  the  level 
of  the  ocean^  and  in  common  with  similar  sandy  deserts  leads 
to  the  supposition  of  their  being  desiccated  sea  beds,  these 
now  add  greatly  to  the  heat  not  only  of  the  neighbouring 
countries;  but  even  of  others  afar  off;  the  radiation  of  heat  in 
those  sandy  wastes  affect  the  temperature  of  a large  portion 
of  Europe.  The  Sirocco  is  known  in  Switzerland  as  the 
Fohn;  or  pestilential  wind;  but  however  justly  so  called  it  is 
still  beneficial  in  ameliorating  the  climate  in  general.  In 
a similar  way  the  hot  winds  of  Central  Australia  sweep  over 
the  southern  portion  of  New  Zealand;  and  raise  the  tempera- 
ture of  its  climate. 

The  greater  extent  of  land  in  the  northern  hemisphere  to 
to  that  of  the  southern;  has  also  been  the  cause  of  a remark- 
able climatic  difference  between  the  two ; extremes  of  heat 
and  cold  distinguishing  the  one;  and  the  absence  of  them 
the  other.  The  gulf  stream  not  only  greatly  improves  the 
climate  of  lands;  which  otherwise  from  their  geographical 
position;  would  have  had  a more  glacial  character;  but  has 
also  effected  great  local  changes  ; the  force  of  its  current; 
which  is  now  scooping  the  Bay  of  Biscay;  in  former  times 
was  most  probably  the  grand  agent  in  sweeping  away  the 
Isthmus;  which  connected  Britain  with  the  continent;  and 
thus  raised  the  sea  level  of  the  German  Ocean;  inundating 
the  low  lands  on  both  sides;  and  forming  fens;  where  before 
there  were  fertile  and  cultivated  districts  on  the  east  coast 
of  England;  and  in  Holland;  whilst  at  the  same  time;  the 
sudden  withdrawal  of  a vast  body  of  water  from  the  south 
side  of  the  Isle  of  Wight  would  naturally  cause  a grand 
subsidence  of  its  coast;  which  formed  a cliff  several  hundred 
feet  high;  and  gave  Yentnor  its  superior  climate;  by  the  shelter 
it  thus  acquired  from  the  cold  winds  of  the  north. 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


489 


The  probable  effect  of  cutting  through  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama  mighty  in  a similar  way,  overwhelm  some  of  the 
West  India  Isles,  and  diverting  the  gulf  stream  from  the 
shores  of  Great  Britain,  thereby  totally  changing  its  climate, 
and  taking  away  its  present  remarkable  exemption  from 
extreme  cold. 

New  Zealand,  like  Britain,  is  also  indebted  to  one  if  not 
two  warm  currents  from  the  tropics,  sweeping  down  either 
coast,  and  attesting  their  presence  by  the  various  seeds  from 
tropical  islands  which  are  continually  being  drifted  on  its 
shores. 

The  effects  of  volcanic  agency  may  be  also  alluded  to, 
their  destructive  results  are  seen,  without  sufficiently  consi- 
dering the  benefits  they  confer : by  their  upheaving  power 
they  enable  man  to  examine  the  very  bowels  of  the  earth, 
and  appropriate  their  riches  to  his  use ; they  also  are  to  be 
viewed  as  the  safety  valves  of  the  earth,  which,  whilst  in 
action,  relieve  the  surrounding  regions  from  the  apprehen- 
sion of  earthquakes,  whilst  the  earth  is  enriched  by  the  various 
substances  ejected.  In  proportion  to  the  quantity  thrown  out, 
will  be  subsidences  and  the  formation  of  lakes  ; at  the  foot  of 
Tongariro,  New  Zealand^  chief  volcano,  is  the  largest  lake 
of  that  island,  nearly  thirty  miles  long  and  as  many  broad. 


MOUNT  METAL  AND  PEMBROKE  PEAK,  MILFORD  SOUND 


490 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


But  whilst  the  lakes  of  the  northern  island  are  chiefly 
formed  by  subsidence  and  volcanic  agency,  those  of  the 
middle  island  owe  their  origin  to  mountain  ranges  filled 
with  deep  valleys,  which,  having  no  outlet  sufficient  to  drain 
them,  of  necessity  become  lakes,  some  of  which  are  of  consi- 
derable size,  Wakatipu  being  nearly  seventy  miles  long. 
The  origin  of  most  lakes  is  similar  to  those  of  New  Zealand, 
excepting  such  as  are  the  evident  remains  of  inland  seas, 
most  of  which  are  gradually  decreasing  in  size. 

Another  grand  feature  of  our  globe  is  the  evident  increase 
of  matter  upon  its  surface,  or  in  other  words  the  thickening 
of  its  crust ; since  the  first  granitic  pavement  of  the  earth 
was  formed  what  wonderful  additions  have  been  made, 
stratum  superimposed  upon  stratum,  until  from  the  Pri- 
mary to  the  Pleistocene  deposits  there  is  an  accumulated 
thickness  estimated  at  little  less  than  fourteen  miles ; can 
this  vast  deposit  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  by  supposing 
it  to  have  been  formed  by  the  debris  of  that  first  pave- 
ment, which  may  have  been  repeatedly  fractured  and  broken 
up  by  different  convulsions  occurring  at  various  epochs 
of  the  earth's  history,  or  by  the  vast  quantity  of  matter 
ejected  from  its  bowels  by  volcanic  agency,  or  by  organic 
remains  and  vegetable  deposits,  by  marine  or  sedementary 
strata ; however  great  all  these  may  be  there  is  still  to 
account  for  their  being  made  without  diminution  of  the 
source  from  whence  they  were  drawn.  The  same  forma- 
tions are  still  going  on  to  a similar  extent,  and  with  the 
same  rapidity  as  at  any  previous  period,  neither  the  earth 
nor  the  ocean  have  lost  their  former  fecundity.  To  take  the 
latter,  when  we  consider  the  immensity  of  those  strata  which 
clearly  owe  their  origin  to  it,  the  oolite,  the  cretaceous, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  mountain  limestone,  the  question  must 
arise.  Whence  this  power  of  production  which  is  ever  going 
on  without  its  force  being  impaired  ? It  must  lead  us  to 
look  for  other  sources  than  those  derived  from  our  planet. 
Has  the  sun  nothing  to  do  in  producing  matter  upon  the 
earth's  surface  ? Having  first  imparted  light  and  heat  from 
the  constant  stream  of  its  rays  ever  flowing  upon  it,  does  it 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE. 


491 


not  also  deposit  tlie  matter  of  which  they  are  composed,  and 
however  inappreciable  the  substance  of  a single  solar  beam 
may  be,  still  in  the  continued  flood  of  them  which  has  ever 
been  pouring  upon  the  globe,  have  we  not  a sufficient  cause 
assigned  for  the  vast  accumulation  of  untold  ages  ? may 
not  solar  light  draw  forth  life,  and  impart  matter  to  clothe 
it  with  form,  and  thus  be  the  grand  agent  Divine  Wisdom 
has  appointed  to  carry  on  the  work  of  progression  through- 
out the  wide  range  of  nature  ? We  know  not  from  what 
remote  periods  that  influence  may  have  been  exercised,  or 
to  what  extent ; commensurate  perhaps  with  the  solar  system 
itself,  but  we  see  what  an  addition  the  earth  has  received, 
many  of  the  strata  it  is  true  have  become  so  altered  by  heat 
as  almost  to  pass  for  a portion  of  the  primitive  crust,  but 
the  metamorphic  rocks,  however  changed,  still  betray  their 
original  fossiliferous  origin,  though  appearing  to  be  crys- 
taline,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  gneiss  rocks.  The 
fossilization  of  substances  is  also  calculated  to  give  an  erro- 
neous idea  of  age ; pure  agatized  wood  may  have  no  age  at 
all,  and  originate  in  heat  and  permeation  of  gases,  which 
only  require  a brief  period  to  effect  the  change. 

Perhaps  the  earliest  fossil  substance  is  that  of  the  conferva 
which  is  found  in  all  but  boiling  pools,  and  was  first  formed 
when  they  existed  on  the  surface  of  the  earth's  earliest  and 
still  naked  pavement,  this  is  seen  in  the  Mocha  stone  ; the 
same  process  may  still  be  going  on  wherever  volcanic  agency 
prevails,  it  is  thus  that  fossilized  trees  in  Australia  are  found 
with  agatized  roots  and  woody  stems. 

The  lasting  proofs  of  the  various  convulsions  which  have 
shattered  the  earth  during  the  different  epochs  of  its  ex- 
istence, and  which  are  still  apparent  on  its  surface,  may  be 
summed  up  in  its  mountain  ranges  and  islands  which  have 
either  been  severed  from,  or  survived  the  continents  of  which 
they  once  formed  a part. 

In  the  northern  hemisphere  the  grounded  icebergs  and 
thickly  strown  remains  of  the  mammoth  on  the  Tundra, 
the  vast  timber  mounds  on  the  Polar  Islands,  the  erratic 
blocks  and  grooved  mountains  of  Britain ; the  arid  plains 


492 


GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  OUR  GLOBE 


of  Africa,  Asia,  and  America,  with  the  prairies  of  North 
and  the  pampas  of  South  America ; the  vast  central  parts  of 
Australia ; and  the  large  inland  seas  and  lakes,  in  all  these 
we  have  traces  of  past  convulsions,  which  even  the  roll  of 
by-gone  ages  and  the  ever- changing  hand  of  time  has  not 
been  able  to  obliterate. 


MOUNT  TARANAKI,  OR  EGMONT,  FROM  WAREATEA. 


AUCKLAND,  IN  ITS  EARLY  DAYS. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


MEANS  OF  SUPPORT. 

The  New  Zealanders  have  always  been  an  agricultural  people; 
their  country  not  naturally  affording  the  means  of  subsist- 
ence in  sufficient  abundance  to  support  them,  without  the 
cultivation  of  the  soil. 

Their  ancestors  brought  the  or  sweet  potatoe — - 

the  taro— an  arum — and  the  hue,  or  calabash  with  them  from 
Hawaiki : these  were  the  only  vegetables  they  possessed, 
and  they  carefully  cultivated  them  until  the  arrival  of  Euro- 
peans, who  introduced  the  potatoe,  the  value  of  which  was 
early  discovered,  so  that  now  it  may  be  said  to  be  their 
staple  article  of  food ; it  is  more  generally  cultivated  than 
the  humara,  from  its  taking  less  labour  in  planting,  and 
yielding  a more  certain  and  larger  return ; for  that  tuber 
requires  not  only  a warm  aspect,  but  an  artificial  soil,  sand 


494 


MEANS  OF  SUPPORT. 


or  gravel  being  laid  on  the  ground  to  the  depth  of  six 
inches  ; so  also  the  taro,  which  needs  the  aid  of  bush  screens 
and  other  expedients  to  make  it  flourish,  these  soon  ex- 
haust the  soil ; three  years  cropping  being,  in  general,  all 
that  can  be  obtained  from  one  spot,  the  place  is  then 
abandoned,  and  another  selected  ; but  this  abandonment 
is  only  for  a space  of  time ; instead  of  turning  up  the  soil, 
and  suffering  it  to  lie  in  fallow  a season,  their  method 
of  renewing  it  is  to  allow  it  to  remain  unoccupied  until  it  is 
covered  with  a certain  growth  of  wood,  if  situated  in  wood 
land ; or  of  fern,  if  in  fern  land,  which  requires  a period  of 
from  seven  to  fourteen  years,  when  the  spot  is  again  cleared 
and  planted,  thus,  many  places,  which  appear  never  to  have 
been  touched  by  the  hand  of  man,  are  pointed  out  as  having 
been  the  farms  of  some  ancestor,  and,  when  more  closely 
regarded,  will  be  found  destitute  of  old  timber,  the  kumara 
taro,  and  even  potatoe  grounds,  are  generally  selected  on 
the  sides  of  hills,  having  a northern  aspect ; by  this  declivity 
towards  the  sun,  they  gain  an  increased  degree  of  heat. 

The  hue  (or  gourd)  is  everywhere  raised,  and  it  is,  indeed, 
an  excellent  vegetable,  bearing  a white  flower,  and  pro- 
ducing a calabash,  sometimes  of  large  dimensions,  when 
young,  it  is  a delicious  vegetable,  sweet,  juicy,  and  extremely 
savoury ; fully  ripe,  it  is  of  the  greatest  use,  supplying 
the  place  of  crockery,  in  it  the  New  Zealander  carries  his 
water,  his  stores,  potted  birds,  fish  or  flesh ; he  also  uses  it 
as  a dish,  and  even  lamp,  it  is  often  beautifully  ornamented 
with  tattooing;  the  natives  have  a singular  idea  respect- 
ing the  hue , that  the  seed  can  always  be  procured  from 
-the  entrails  of  the  sperm  whale,  which  they  affirm  has  been 
frequently  verified ; they  account  for  it  by  saying,  that 
in  Hawaiki  the  hue  grows  spontaneously,  and  hangs  over  the 
cliffs  in  great  quantities,  which,  when  ripe,  fall  into  the  sea, 
and  are  devoured  by  the  whales,  which  frequent  that  part. 

The  melon  and  pumpkin  are  now  cultivated,  as  well  as 
the  cabbage  and  turnip,  which  grow  wild,  having  been 
introduced  by  Cook ; maize  and  wheat  have  been  more 
recently  raised,  but  are  now  grown  in  large  quantities. 


MEANS  OF  SUPPOBT. 


495 


To  a stranger,  the  natural  means  of  support  may  appear  few 
and  insignificant ; but,  in  early  times,  when  wars  raged,  or 
unfruitful  seasons  destroyed  the  hopes  of  the  kumara  harvest, 
the  New  Zealanders  had  recourse  to  the  indigenous  produc- 
tions of  the  land ; almost  every  spot  produces  some  kind  of 
food,  the  plains  being  covered  with  the  joteris . esculentis, 
edible  fern,  although  that  which  is  selected  for  food  only 
attains  a proper  size  on  rich  land,  the  roots  chosen  for  this 
purpose  are  found  about  a foot  and  a half  or  two  feet  deep, 
and  are  dug  up  with  a long  strong  pole,  sharpened  at  one 
end,  with  a rest  for  the  foot,  called  a ko  ; the  upper  roots 
are  stringy,  hard  and  harsh  to  the  palate,  but  the  lower  ones 
contain  more  farinaceous  matter,  when  dug  up  they  are 
either  stacked  to  dry  on  the  spot  for  future  use,  or  eaten 
fresh.  The  way  of  cooking  the  root  is  to  lay  it  on  the 
embers  for  a short  time,  till  sufficiently  roasted;  it  is  then 
scraped  with  a shell,  to  take  off  the  blackened  outside,  and 
afterwards  beaten  with  a wooden  or  stone  mallet  to  loosen 
the  fibres,  the  natives  sometimes  pound  it  into  masses, 
pulling  out  the  fibres,  and  putting  it  in  calabashes,  con- 
taining the  juice  of  the  tujpakihi , it  is  eaten  immediately  it  is 
cooked,  and  is  by  no  means  unpalatable  or  astringent,  as  is 
generally  supposed,  but  rather  the  contrary;  even  to  the 
present  day,  it  is  an  article  much  prized,  especially  by  the 
sick,  who  often  prefer  it  to  any  other  food ; and  it  is  always 
taken  by  the  natives  on  a voyage,  as  the  best  antidote  for 
sea-sickness. 

Several  species  of  the  joerei  and  maikaika  ( orchis ) are 
likewise  eaten,  also  the  tender  shoot  of  the  nikau  ( areca 
apidajj  and  ti  tree,  as  well  as  its  tap  root,  and  those  of  the 
toiy  these  are  baked  in  a native  oven,  and,  when  cooked,  have 
a sweet  and  pleasant  taste.  The  root  of  the  ranpo  (bulrush), 
and  the  shoot  of  ftingao , a sedgy  plant,  growing  by  the  sea 
side,  often  afford  the  hungry  traveller  a meal. 

The  chief  article  of  food  furnished  by  the  forest  is  the 
mamaku  (a  tree  fern),  the  stem  is  often  twenty  feet  long, 
and  is  all  eaten ; when  the  outside  is  pared  off,  there  is  a 
medullary  substance,  sometimes  eight  inches  in  diameter. 


496 


MEANS  OF  SUPPORT. 


with  scarcely  any  fibre  in  it;  this  is  slightly  sweet  and 
really  agreeable,  when  cooked,  it  is  called  pitau  ; it  is  not 
improbable  that  if  it  were  dried  it  might  be  used  as  sago,  it 
is  highly  prized  in  winter. 

The  fruit  of  the  rimu  and  kahikatea  pines  is  also  eaten, 
they  produce  a small  red  berry,  about  the  size  of  a sweet 
pea,  the  stone  being  outside,  and  are  found  in  great  abun- 
dance every  alternate  season. 

Fungi  growing  on  dead  timber,  the  harori-tui , harori- 
atua , and  several  other  kinds,  although  exactly  like  our 
English  toadstools  in  appearance,  are  equal  in  flavor  and 
nutrition  to  the  mushroom  ; but  amongst  all  the  indigenous 
fruits,  there  is  none  superior  to  the  tawera  or  pirori  ffrey- 
sinetsiaj , a species  of  padanus,  somewhat  resembling  a 
pine  apple  ; both  the  flower  and  fruit  are  eaten.  The  juice 
of  the  tupakihi  (coriaria  sarmentosa)  is  expressed  in  large 
quantities,  and  drank ; it  is  also  boiled  with  sea-weed,  and 
thus  forms  a jelly,  which  is  very  palatable.  Several  kinds  of 
sea- weed  are  also  eaten. 

The  only  terrestrial  animal  originally  found  in  these  islands 
was  a small  rat,  scarcely  more  than  one-third  the  size  of  the 
imported  one,  though  now  nearly  extinct  and  seldom  seen, 
it  was  formerly  so  numerous  as  to  form  a considerable  article 
of  food,  it  was  taken  by  an  ingenious  kind  of  trap,  which 
somewhat  resembles  ours  for  the  mole,  these  were  set  on 
lines  of  road,  which  had  been  made  expressly  for  this  pur- 
pose in  the  forest ; and  they  generally  succeeded  in  taking 
sufficient  at  once  to  feed  the  whole  pa. 

The  kiwi  ( apteryx  Australis ) was  hunted  at  night  with 
dogs,  the  natives  can  so  closely  imitate  the  cry  of  this  bird, 
that  they  soon  draw  together  all  which  may  be  in  that  part 
of  the  forest ; they  generally  carry  a torch  under  their 
garments  until  it  approaches ; the  light  is  then  suddenly 
produced,  which  so  terrifies  the  bird  that  it  allows  itself 
to  be  secured ; the  kiwi  is  still  abundant  in  some  places. 
The  kakapo , or  ground  parrot,  is  a gregarious  bird,  larger 
than  the  common  fowl : it  was  hunted  with  dogs  and  torches 
at  night ; it  is  now  all  but  extinct  in  the  northern  island. 


MEANS  OF  SUPPORT. 


497 


though  it  is  said  to  be  more  plentiful  in  the  southern  one. 
The  weka , a large  rail,  is  still  found  in  the  interior  of  the 
north  island,  and  readily  approaches  the  natives,  who  imitate 
its  cry,  it  is  so  pugnacious,  that  if  a bit  of  red  cloth  or  other 
rag  be  tied  to  a stick,  it  flies  at  it  immediately,  and  is  thus 
easily  caught  by  a noose  held  in  the  other  hand.  The  Jcereru , 
or  wood-pigeon,  is  a fine  but  stupid  bird,  it  is  frequently 
taken  by  placing  a pole  near  the  water’s  edge,  where  it  is 
accustomed  to  drink,  when  it  has  quenched  its  thirst,  it 
alights  on  this,  which  being  completely  covered  with  snares 
made  of  flax,  it  soon  gets  its  legs  entangled  in  them,  and 
is  secured ; the  rimu  and  fcahihatea  pine  trees,  when  in 
fruit,  are  also  thickly  set  with  snares,  by  which  means  num- 
bers are  taken ; the  natives  have  a long  bird-spear,  often 
from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  in  length,  armed  with  a sharp  barb 
of  bone,  with  this  they  silently  approach  the  tree  on  which 
the  bird  has  alighted,  and  it  is  generally  so  stupid  as  to  stay 
and  be  speared,  although  it  sees  its  enemy  approach ; if  the 
tree  be  one  to  which  the  pigeon  is  accustomed  to  resort,  on 
account  of  the  abundance  of  fruit,  the  natives  then  construct 
a ladder  by  ingeniously  binding  two  young  trees  together, 
which  may  be  growing  near,  and  use  them  for  that  pur- 
pose, by  which  means  they  can  approach  the  bird  with  the 
greater  facility,  numbers  of  pigeons  are  thus  captured,  they 
extract  all  their  bones,  and,  when  cooked,  place  them  in  a 
large  pqpa,  or  vessel  made  of  the  totara  bark  ; thus  preserved 
in  their  own  fat,  they  will  keep  good  for  a long  time ; the 
tui,  when  in  season,  is  very  fat,  and  is  also  preserved  in  a 
similar  way,  it  is  a most  lively  bird,  and  can  only  be  taken 
by  snares.  The  kaka,  or  great  brown  parrot,  one  of  the 
largest  of  its  family,  is  also  eaten ; it  is  generally  caught  by 
means  of  a tame  parrot,  used  as  a decoy ; a pole  is  stuck  in 
the  ground,  in  an  inclined  position,  in  some  shady  part  of 
the  forest,  on  which  the  tame  bird  is  placed ; the  native 
forms  a little  arbor  with  a few  large  leaves  of  the  fern  tree, 
in  which  he  sits  concealed  with  a small  stick  in  his  hand,  the 
call  of  the  tame  bird  soon  attracts  some  of  its  wild  com- 
panions, which,  when  they  alight  on  the  pole,  are  enticed 


498 


MEANS  OF  SUPPORT. 


still  lower,  until  the  fowler  either  seizes  them  with  his  hand, 
or  knocks  them  down  with  his  stick.  The  kakariki , or  small 
green  parrot,  is  taken  by  snares;  it  is  a delicious  bird,  and  very 
abundant.  The  titi,  or  mutton-bird,  a sea  fowl,  which  goes 
inland  at  night,  just  as  the  light  wanes,  flies  about  in  great 
numbers,  and  fills  the  air  with  its  cries,  to  effect  its  capture, 
the  natives  select  some  spot  on  the  edge  of  a lofty  precipice, 
where  they  cut  down  all  the  trees  which  intercept  the  view, 
and  there  build  a little  shed  close  to  the  verge ; they  then 
light  a bright  fire,  behind  which  they  sit,  each  armed  with  a 
long  stick ; the  titi  are  attracted  by  the  light,  and  fly  close 
by  in  great  numbers,  so  that  they  are  easily  knocked  down, 
and  thus,  in  one  night,  hundreds  are  often  killed,  which,  like 
the  pigeon,  are  preserved  in  their  own  fat  for  future  use. 

These  are  the  principal  birds  upon  which  the  New  Zea- 
landers lived  ; and,  though  there  were  many  smaller  varieties 
eaten,  some  of  which  are  now  extinct,  it  is  not  necessary 
here  to  enumerate  them.  The  water-fowl,  the  wild  duck,  wio, 
pukeko,  and  several  others,  were  more  rarely  captured,  and  can 
scarcely  be  said  to  have  contributed  much  to  their  support. 

Fishing  may  be  considered  as  being  of  two  kinds — fresh 
water  and  salt.  New  Zealand  is  not  rich  in  its  fresh  water 
fish,  yet,  such  as  they  are,  they  are  generally  taken  in  large 
quantities,  and  all  very  good  eating.  The  principal  ones 
are  the  tuna,  eel,  the  pijoiharau,  lamprey,  the  kokojpu,  and 
inanga ; the  eel  is  much  larger  than  the  English,  some 
are  nearly  six  feet  in  length,  occasionally  as  thick  as  a 
man's  thigh,  and  extremely  fat ; still,  the  general  size  is 
much  less  ; to  take  this  fish,  a weir  is  constructed  in  rivers ; 
a strong  fence  is  formed  with  poles,  two  of  which  are 
wide  apart  at  one  end,  and  approach  nearer  at  the  other, 
where  the  narrow  outlet  is  covered  with  a large  net,  having 
a bag  or  basket  at  the  end,  in  which  they  are  captured ; the 
small  eels  are  often  dried  by  being  hung  up  in  the  sun,  when 
they  become  like  bags  of  rancid  oil ; the  larger  ones  are  split 
open,  and  dried  in  the  usual  way ; the  lamprey  is  taken  in 
the  same  way  as  the  eel ; properly  speaking  it  is  a salt-water 
fish,  which  enters  the  rivers  in  the  spring  to  spawn ; from  its 


MEANS  OF  SUPPORT. 


499 


being  very  oily,  it  is  highly  prized ; it  ascends  the  rivers  to 
their  very  source,  and  then  the  head  grows  to  an  unnatural 
size,  when  it  is  said  to  be  unwholesome,  and  is  not  eaten ; 
the  head,  to  an  European  who  is  not  accustomed  to  it,  has  a 
very  disgusting  appearance  ; so  extremely  fond  are  the  natives 
of  the  lamprey,  that  deaths  from  over-eating  it  are  far  from 
being  uncommon  ; the  inanga  is  a very  diminutive  fish,  not 
at  all  larger  than  the  English  minnow ; it  is,  however,  the 
chief  fish  of  the  New  Zealand  lakes,  and  its  small  size  is 
made  up  by  its  great  abundance  ; they  are  driven  into  shoal 
water,  and  caught  with  a long  shallow  oval  net,  but  are  also 
taken  in  deep  water  by  a cone-shaped  net,  which  is  fastened 
to  a frame,  and  thrust  down  with  a long  pole  ; when  boiled, 
the  water  is  drained  from  them,  which  the  natives  greedily 
drink, — they  are  pressed  into  a compact  mass,  and  eaten 
entire,  being  scaleless ; the  koko'pu  is  another  fresh- water 
fish,  nearly  ten  inches  long,  one  kind  has  scales,  another  is 
without ; they  are  generally  taken  in  the  nets  with  other  fish, 
but  in  no  great  quantity ; the  papanoko  is  a scaleless  fresh- 
water fish,  about  five  inches  long ; it  is  rather  rare,  but  much 
prized,  its  roe  being  nearly  as  large  as  the  fish  itself ; the 
jpariri  is  the  male  of  this  fish  ; the  tikihemi  corresponds 
with  our  trout ; in  shape  and  appearance  it  is  much  like 
an  eel,  hence  is  named  the  eel  trout ; it  is  sometimes  found 
of  the  length  of  fourteen  inches,  but  is  seldom  taken  in  any 
quantity ; the  ujpokororo  is  a fish  about  eight  inches  long, 
with  scales,  it  is  caught  in  the  autumn,  it  bites  at  the  hair 
of  the  legs,  and  is  thus  caught  by  the  natives  going  into  the 
water. 

A small  fish  is  also  found  in  the  Rotoaira  Lake,  and  in  the 
streams  which  gush  out  of  the  sides  of  Tongariro,  called 
the  fish  of  Hades,  and  is  of  a buff  color,  and  spotted  like  a 
leopards  skin,  this  little  fish  is  so  full  of  oil  that  it  is  boiled 
without  water,  and  is  greatly  esteemed.  The  fresh -water  mus- 
sel, kakahi , and  crayfish,  koura , occasionally  furnish  a meal. 

The  principal  salt-water  fish  formerly  eaten  was  the  shark, 
mango , which  was  caught  in  great  numbers  with  the  hook ; 
they  were  cut  open,  and  then  hung  up  in  the  sun  and  wind 

kk2 


500 


HOUSES. 


on  high  horizontal  poles  to  dry  ; and  before  they  were  so, 
generally  became  quite  putrid  ; it  was  a winter  food,  a small 
quantity  being  cooked  as  a relish  for  their  kumara,  which, 
in  flavor,  nearly  corresponds  with  our  rich  rotten  cheese. 
The  tam,ure,  or  snapper,  and  the  Jcahawai,  mackerel,  were 
taken  with  a hook  attached  to  a piece  of  the  haliotis  shell ; 
being  deceived  by  its  resemblance  to  a fish,  they  were  easily 
caught  j the  hapuhu , or  cod,  is  the  most  prized  of  sea  fish, 
and  often  attains  a very  large  size,  weighing  fifty  pounds  or 
more ; the  conger  eel  is  also  eaten.  Some  fish  are  taken 
with  the  seine,  which  they  make  of  great  length. 

Seals  were  formerly  abundant,  and  much  prized  as  food  ; 
in  fact,  all  was  fish  which  came  to  the  net,  even  bats  and 
Owls  were  not  despised ; oysters,  mussels,  and  other  shell- 
fish, formed  also  a portion  of  their  support,  these  were  dried, 
and  hung  upon  strings  for  winter’s  use. 


Houses. 

The  European  traveller  who  crawls  into  a native  hut  for 
the  first  time,  will  see  nothing  particularly  interesting  in  it ; 
he  will,  perhaps,  only  view  it  as  a dark  smoky  hovel ; but 
when  he  becomes  acquainted  with  native  customs,  and 
observes  the  order  and  arrangement  displayed,  the  careful 
way  it  is  constructed,  and  how  perfectly  the  object  aimed  at 
is  attained,  he  will  not  withhold  its  meed  of  praise. 

The  principal  houses  are  called  ivare-puni,  or  warm  houses ; 
this  name  may  be  given  either  from  the  number  of  persons 
generally  residing  in  them,  or  from  their  being  so  built  as  to 
exclude  the  external  air ; they  are  usually  sunk  one  or  two 
feet  in  the  earth,  and  nearly  always  front  the  sun  ; the  sides 
of  one  are  seldom  more  than  four  feet  high,  being  formed  of 
large  broad  slabs  of  totara,  the  most  durable  timber,  having  a 
small  circular  groove  or  opening  cut  into  the  top  to  receive 
the  rafters,  helce  ; these  slabs  are  either  adzed,  and  painted 
with  red  ochre ; or,  if  it  be  a very  superior  house,  each  one 
is  grotesquely  carved  to  represent  some  ancestor  of  the 
family,  in  which  case  they  become  a kind  of  substitute  for 


HOUSES. 


501 


the  nobleman’s  ancestral  picture  gallery ; between  these 
posts  there  is  generally  a space  of  two  feet,  which  is  filled 
up  with  a kind  of  lattice-work,  composed  of  slender  laths, 
dyed  black,  white,  or  red,  and  bound  together  with  narrow 
strips  of  the  kiekie  leaf,  very  tastefully  disposed  in  patterns, 
this  is  called  arapaki ; there  is  also  a skirting  board  (jpajpa- 
whaij  painted  red ; and  the  rafters,  which  are  either  carved 
or  painted  with  different  colored  ochres,  rest  on  a ridge 
pole  (tahuhuj  in  which  a notch  is  cut  to  receive  them  ; 
this  ridge  pole  is  always  the  entire  length  of  the  build- 
ing, including  that  of  the  verandah,  being  generally  of  a 
triangular  shape,  and  very  heavy ; it  is  supported  by  a 
post  or  pillar  fjoou-tahuJ , in  the  middle  of  the  house,  the 
bottom  of  which  is  carved  in  the  form  of  a human  figure, 
representing  the  founder  of  the  family — and  is  thus  a kind 
of  lares  ; immediately  before  the  face  of  this  figure  is 
the  fire-place,  a small  pit  formed  by  four  slab  stones  sunk 
into  the  ground  ; perhaps  this  is  some  relic  of  ancient  fire- 
worship  in  the  position  of  the  fire,  which,  as  a domestic  altar, 
always  burns  before  the  face  of  the  image  of  their  deified 
ancestor. 

The  entrance  to  the  house  is  by  a sliding  door  (tatau), 
which  is  formed  of  a solid  slab  of  wood,  about  two  feet  and 
a half  high,  and  a foot  and  a half  wide  ; the  way  of  fastening 
it  when  the  owners  were  absent,  was  by  means  of  a stick, 
which  passed  through  a loop  in  the  door  and  crossed  the  side 
posts ; it  could  of  course  be  opened  by  any  one,  but  was 
always  regarded  as  tapu  j they  were  also  accustomed  to  secure 
their  doors  by  complicated  knots,  when  likely  to  be  absent  for 
any  length  of  time.  On  the  right  side  of  this  is  a window, 
( mato/pihi3 ) generally  about  ten  inches  high  and  two  feet 
wide;  this  also  is  furnished  with  a slide,  which  goes  into 
the  wall  of  the  building ; another  window  is  placed  in  the 
roof,  a kind  of  trap-door,  termed  a jpihanga , or  jpuhanga, 
literally  gills  or  lungs,  a breathing  place,  more  than  an 
aperture  for  admitting  light,  which  is  not  required  in  a 
whare-jpuni  at  night.  On  entering,  there  is  a low  slab  of 
wood  on  either  side,  to  partition  off  the  sleeping  places. 


502 


HOUSES. 


leaving  a path  down  the  middle,  that  nearest  the  door  being 
about  eighteen  inches  high,  in  which  the  inmates  lay  in  rows, 
each  with  his  feet  towards  the  fire,  and  his  head  to  the  wall ; 
the  chief,  or  owner  of  the  house,  invariably  takes  the  right 
side  next  the  window,  the  place  of  honor ; the  next  in  point  of 
rank  occupy  those  nearest  to  him,  whilst  the  slaves,  and  per- 
sons of  no  consequence,  go  to  the  furthest  end.  Their  bedding 
(wariJci)  seldom  consists  of  anything  more  than  one  or  more 
ground  mats  (waikawa),  upon  which  sometimes  a finer  one 
(tihenga  pora)  is  laid,  and  a round  log,  or  a bundle  of  fern, 
serves  as  a pillow  furunga) . Formerly,  they  never  ate  in 
their  houses,  therefore  verandahs  (mahau)  were  required. 
The  length  of  a whare-puni  is  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet,  and 
the  breadth  sixteen ; the  verandah  is  seldom  more  than  six  feet 
in  depth,  being  a continuation  of  the  gable  end  of  the  house, 
having  the  entire  width  of  the  building ; it  has  a broad  slab 
in  front,  about  two  feet  and  a half  high,  which  separates 
it  from  the  road,  from  this  a post  rises  to  the  ridge  pole, 
which  is  surmounted  with  a carved  figure.  The  verandah  is 
ornamented  in  the  same  way  as  the  interior  of  the  house,  its 
wall  plate  is  often  carved  to  represent  the  prostrate  figures  of 
slaves  on  whose  bodies  the  pillars  which  support  the  house 
stand;  this  seems  to  refer  to  an  extinct  custom  of  killing 
human  victims,  and  placing  them  in  the  holes  made  to  receive 
the  posts,  that  the  house  being  founded  in  blood,  might 
stand ; the  custom  still  prevails  in  Borneo  and  other  parts. 
Over  the  door  is  a board  called  maihi , elaborately  carved, 
and  adorned  with  bunches  of  pigeon  feathers  ; the  facings  of 
the  door-posts  and  window  are  similarly  ornamented;  the 
building  is  covered  externally  with  raupo  or  sedge,  and 
roofed  with  the  same,  then  with  grass,  or  a similar  sub- 
stance, to  a considerable  thickness ; earth  is  generally  heaped 
up  against  the  sides,  so  as  almost  to  reach  the  eaves. 

At  sunset,  a fire  is  made  in  the  house,  which  is  allowed  to 
burn  clear  for  some  time,  and  fill  the  little  pit  with  embers, 
when  it  ceases  to  smoke,  the  occupants  enter ; the  door  and 
window  being  closed,  the  heat  soon  becomes  almost  as  great 
as  that  of  an  oven,  and  of  such  a stifling  nature,  from  the 


NATIVE  OVENS. 


503 


fumes  of  the  charcoal,  that  few  Europeans  can  bear  it,  yet 
frequently  twenty,  thirty,  or  more  natives  will  sleep  in  this 
place  huddled  together,  and  almost  in  a state  of  nudity  ; 
sometimes  even  they  suffer,  from  the  charcoal  being  too 
powerful ; this  was  formerly  attributed  to  the  visits  of  the 
patupaiarehe. 

Native  Ovens. 

The  native  oven  fumu  hangi)  is  a circular  hole  of  about 
two  feet  in  diameter,  and  from  six  to  twelve  inches  deep, 
this  was  formerly  scraped  out  with  the  end  of  a pointed 
stick;  the  process  of  cooking  by  it  is  very  simple,  and 
universally  prevailed  throughout  the  South  Seas,  it  is  in- 
teresting as  marking  an  identity  of  race ; a fire  is  made  in 
this  hole,  the  wood  being  piled  up  nearly  a foot  above  its 
level,  and  upon  it  is  laid  a layer  of  stones  as  large  or  larger 
than  a man's  fist ; when  the  fire  has  completely  heated  the 
stones,  the  cook,  generally  a female,  (sometimes  two  or 
more,)  quickly  and  dexterously  removes  the  hot  stones, 
either  with  the  fingers  or  two  short  sticks,  and  clears  out  all 
the  embers;  then  returning  some  of  the  stones  to  the  oven, 
she  covers  them  up  with  a layer  of  green  leaves  fwata 
wataj  and  sprinkles  water  over  them ; having  thus  lined 
the  oven,  the  kumara  and  potatoes,  which  have  been  well 
scraped  and  washed,  are  then  put  in  and  piled  up;  if  meat 
is  to  be  cooked,  it  is  bound  round  with  green  leaves,  to 
keep  in  the  gravy : this  is  always  done  with  large  eels, 
when  they  are  intended  for  guests  of  distinction ; to  these 
a few  leaves  of  wild  cabbage,  a bundle  of  sow-thistle  are 
added  as  a relish;  the  whole  being  likewise  covered  with 
green  leaves,  as  well  as  the  sides  of  the  oven,  water  is  then 
plentifully  sprinkled  over,  and  upon  them  is  placed  a layer 
of  flax  mats,  tapora,  or  old  Jcete  (baskets),  which  have  been 
previously  soaked,  and  are  carefully  tucked  in  at  the  sides  ; 
the  cook  next  covers  the  whole  with  earth  so  closely  that 
the  steam  thus  generated  cannot  escape ; an  hour  or  less  is 
sufficient  to  cook  a very  large  quantity  of  food,  during  which 
time  the  operator  sits  down  and  plaits  a number  of  baskets 


504 


PUA  BREAD. 


with  green  flax,  or  ti  leaves ; when  she  opens  the  oven,  she 
first  carefully  removes  the  earth  in  the  same  manner  as  it 
was  put  on  ; then  the  mats  are  taken  off  with  a little  jerk 
outwards,  so  that  not  a particle  of  earth  falls  on  the  oven ; 
the  covering  of  leaves  is  removed,  and  the  food,  deposited 
in  the  clean  new  baskets,  is  placed  before  the  guests,  each 
portion  having  some  of  the  thistle  or  cabbage  leaves  laid 
upon  them,  with  a piece  of  meat,  if  there  be  any.* 

They  usually  leave  a small  portion  of  the  food,  which 
has  been  rather  burnt  by  the  stones  at  the  bottom,  and  the 
ladies  eat  it  while  sitting  round  the  oven.  Etiquette  does 
not  allow  any  of  the  hosts  to  come  near  their  guests  when 
eating ; and,  if  previously  sitting  with  them,  they  remove  to  a 
distance;  when  the  visitors  are  many  and  of  high  rank,  all 
the  principal  ladies,  and  even  the  chiefs,  bear  the  food ; 
each  taking  a hete , and  walking  in  a long  train  one  after 
the  other,  sets  the  food  before  the  guests,  and  then  retires. 
This  is  often  a very  pretty  sight. 


Pua  Bread. 

I sent  specimens  of  different  kinds  of  bread  made  by  the 
Maori  to  the  Boyal  Exhibition  in  1851.  The  first  was  of 
Aruhe,  the  root  of  the  Pteris  esculenta,  the  most  generally 
used  as  food  by  the  natives  in  former  days.  Another  kind 
forwarded  was  that  made  from  the  berries  of  the  Hinau 
(Eleocarpus  Hinau),  these  are  extremely  astringent,  but 
when  steeped  for  some  time  in  water,  they  become  per- 
fectly sweet  and  wholesome ; the  bread  made  from  the 

* The  natives  of  South  Australia  cook  their  food  in  a similar  manner.  A 
hole  ( kangayappa ) is  dug  in  the  ground,  and  a fire  kindled  in  it,  upon  which 
stones  are  laid  to  be  heated.  During  the  time  these  are  being  heated,  they 
prepare  the  game  or  vegetables,  and  then  remove  the  stones  and  larger  remains 
of  wood  ; and,  if  they  stew  a kangaroo,  they  first  fill  the  inside  with  part  of  the 
hot  stones,  and  leaves  of  the  gum  tree.  The  kangaroo  is  then  put  into  the 
hole,  and  covered  with  leaves,  the  remaining  stones,  bark,  and  earth.  It 
remains  there  for  an  hour  or  more,  until  steam  escapes  from  different  parts  ; 
when  this  takes  place,  the  meat,  or  whatever  is  cooking,  is  sufficiently  done — 
J.  P.  Gill,  Esq.,  Tasmanian  Journal , vol.  i,  p.  112. 


PUA  BREAD. 


505 


mealy  substance  which  surrounds  the  stones,  is  collected 
and  tied  up  in  leaves,  and  then  steamed  in  the  oven,  this 
is  thus  rendered  nutritious  and  palateable;  the  third  kind 
is  made  from  the  pollen,  Pua , of  the  Raupo  (Typha  augas- 
tifolia),  the  New  Zealand  bull-rush,  this  is  collected  with 
great  care,  and  made  into  large  cakes  called  Punga  punga, 
and  was  so  highly  prized  as  to  be  only  eaten  by  Chiefs. 
I forwarded  a large  cake  of  it  to  the  Exhibition ; when  first 
made  it  is  of  a bright  yellow  color  and  sweet,  as  if  mixed 
with  honey.  It  was  singular  that  a similar  kind  of  bread 
was  also  forwarded  from  Scinde,  on  these  two,  Professor 
Lindley,  in  a lecture  on  edible  substances,  made  the  fol- 
lowing remarks  : — 

“ There  is  another  very  curious  substance.  These  are 
cakes  of  Typha  Bread,  this  from  Scinde,  that  from  New 
Zealand,  where  they  are  articles  of  food  prepared  from  the 
pollen  of  the  common  reed  mace  or  bull-rush  of  those  coun- 
tries. The  one  from  Scinde,  which  is  called  Boor , or  Booree, 
is  made  from  the  pollen  of  the  flowers  of  the  tyjoha  elephan- 
tina , or  elephanPs  grass  of  the  country ; the  other,  which 
is  called  Punga  punga  by  the  natives  of  New  Zealand,  is 
obtained  from  another  species  of  bulrush,  called  Typha 
augustifolia  (the  common  Maori  name  is  Pua  for  this  bread) ; 
these  are  the  only  cases  known  of  the  pollen  of  plants  being 
used  for  food  under  any  circumstances,  and  it  is  not  a little 
singular  that  countries  so  far  apart  as  Scinde  and  New  Zea- 
land, should  have  the  same  most  unusual  kind  of  diet ; it  is 
also  interesting  to  know  that  the  value  attached  to  this  as 
an  article  of  food  is  not  imaginary,  for  it  appears  from  the 
researches  of  chemists  that  the  pollen  of  plants  contains  an 
azotized  matter,  which  mixed  with  the  starch  existing  in 
pollen  in  great  quantities,  and  with  other  matters,  will  give 
a real  nutritive  value  to  this  curious  substance.” 

But  the  close  resemblance  of  the  name  used  in  these  two 
widely-separated  countries  for  the  same  substance,  is  still 
more  singular,  being  in  Scinde  Boor  or  Booree , and  in 
New  Zealand  Pua  ; “ and  it  is  strange,”  remarks  Professor 
Boyle,  “that  the  Indo-European  languages  all  exhibit  the 


506 


PUA  BREAD. 


most  striking  coincidences  in  words  expressive  of  the  first 
peaceful  arts  of  mankind,  whilst  the  terms  connected  with 
the  chase  or  war  are  mostly  peculiar.” 

The  process  of  making  bread  from  the  pua  is  curious,  both 
on  account  of  the  patience  required  to  collect  sufficient  for  the 
purpose,  and  for  the  religious  rites  connected  with  it,  showing, 
most  clearly,  how  very  much  pinched  for  food  the  aborigines 
formerly  were,  and  the  great  stress  they  laid  upon  religion 
in  aiding  their  efforts  to  procure  it;  the  number  of  terms 
applying  to  the  process,  is  a proof  of  the  value  once  put 
upon  this  article  of  food. 

The  first  thing  done,  was  the  erection  of  a shed  near  the 
swamp,  from  which  the  pollen  was  to  be  collected,  the  pro- 
cess of  gathering  it  always  commenced  at  daybreak ; for  when 
the  sun  began  to  shine,  the  feathery  seeds  blew  about,  they 
had  then  to  discontinue  their  work  until  the  evening,  this 
gathering  of  the  flower  heads  of  the  raupo  was  continued  for 
several  days,  until  a sufficienty  of  pollen  was  obtained,  they 
then  cut  a quantity  of  flowers  of  the  hahalio  (arundo  Aus- 
tralis), which  being  laid  upon  a mat  in  the  shed,  the  pua  was 
heaped  upon  them,  and  daily  carried  into  the  sun  to  dry, 
and  again  returned  in  the  evening,  lest  it  should  become 
damp  with  the  dew,  parties  of  from  fifty  to  sixty  men, 
women,  and  children,  often  assembled  for  this  work ; each 
family  having  its  own  division  (tuakoi)  of  the  shed  to  attend 
to ; when  the  process  of  collecting  was  finished,  they  went 
into  the  forest  to  procure  the  bark  of  the  hinau  {eloeocarpus 
hinau),  which  they  stripped  off  the  trees  in  large  pieces, 
twelve  or  fourteen  feet  long,  these  were  doubled  up  so  as  to 
make  a bag,  a small  hole  at  one  end  being  left  open  to  form 
a mouth,  while  the  sides  were  sewed  with  flax ; being  set  on 
their  ends,  they  formed  long  bags,  almost  as  tall  as  a man, 
which  were  propped  up  by  poles,  they  then  took  the  mats 
(tapaki),  which  had  been  previously  plaited  by  the  women,  of 
split  flax,  and  spread  them  on  the  ground  by  the  side  of  the 
bag  (pu),  part  of  them  stripped  the  flower  from  the  stem : 
this  process  was  called  uhu  ; a quantity  being  shred,  it  was 
put  into  bags,  which  had  been  plaited  with  great  care 


PUA  BREAD. 


507 


of  finely  split  flax,  so  as  to  allow  only  tlie  smallest  par- 
ticles to  escape,  men  only  were  allowed  to  sift  tlie  pua, 
winch  was  done  by  shaking  these  bags  over  the  mouth 
of  the  larger  one,  while  the  tohunga  repeated  a karakia. 
The  principal  person  of  each  family  had  to  sift  it;  but,  if 
guilty  of  any  crime,  the  pua  would  fly  up  in  his  face,  and 
he  would  be  forced  to  give  place  to  a better  man;  whilst 
some  were  sifting,  others  were  plaiting  small  baskets 
( rourou , hapukapu,  paro)  of  green  flax,  which  were  lined 
with  the  leaves  of  the  rangiora  or  puhapuka  (hr  achy  glottis 
rcpanda),  to  place  the  sifted  pua  in  : the  tutae  papapa, 
or  down,  being  thrown  away,  the  plug  was  then  removed 
from  the  bottom  corner  of  the  bag,  the  pua  flowed  out,  and 
was  caught  in  the  baskets,  carefully  avoiding  to  press  it 
down,  in  which  state  it  resembled  small  seeds,  the  baskets 
being  filled  were  covered  over  with  leaves  as  before,  and 
then  sewed  up  {puna),  and  placed  in  the  ovens  ( [hangi ),  these 
having  been  covered  over  as  usual,  were  left  till  the  steam 
burst  out  at  the  top,  the  sign  they  were  done ; when  taken 
out,  the  substance  still  retained  its  resemblance  to  seeds  ; 
but  the  baking  converted  it  into  a solid  mass. 

The  chief  of  the  party  then  divided  the  loaves  amongst 
the  people,  some  thus  made  were  from  six  to  eight  inches 
in  diameter,  and  thick  in  proportion ; the  smaller  ones  were 
eaten  at  the  time,  the  larger  being  reserved  as  presents,  for 
state  occasions,  or  for  supplies  during  war ; a loaf  of  seven 
inches  in  diameter  was  sufficient  to  satisfy  two  full-grown  men. 

Having  been  rendered  sacred  by  the  prayers  of  the  to- 
hunga, no  one  could  eat  of  it  until  the  first  oven,  containing 
only  three  or  four  baskets,  had  been  cooked  for  the  priest, 
who  then  took  off  the  tapu. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  when  the  down  ( hune ) obtained  from 
the  raupo  heads  is  put  into  baskets,  it  is  invariably  filled 
with  a small  kind  of  worm,  or  grub,  in  large  quantities,  it  is, 
therefore,  generally  baked,  and  then  is  at  once  fit  for  making 
beds  and  pillows,  for  which  purpose  it  is  commonly  used, 
and  forms  a good  substitute  for  feathers. 

To  make  bread  of  the  hinau  (eloeocarpus  hinauj,  the  berries 


508 


PUA  BREAD. 


are  steeped  for  nearly  a year  in  running  water,  to  get  rid  of 
their  bitter  and  astringent  quality,  they  are  then  put  into  a 
basket  (pu)  which  has  been  plaited  very  close,  and  beaten  upon 
a stone  with  a small  wooden  club  ; this  being  sufficiently  done, 
they  are  sifted  through  other  closely -plaited  baskets ; the  husks, 
thus  separated  from  the  pulp,  are  thrown  away,  and  the  latter, 
which  resembles  dark  olive-colored  flour,  is  kneaded  into  cakes 
with  a little  water ; these  being  wrapped  up  in  leaves  of  the 
rangiora,  are  placed  in  a native  oven ; when  cooked,  they 
have  much  the  appearance  of  very  brown  bread,  and  are 
highly  esteemed  by  the  natives,  though  too  oily  to  suit  the 
taste  of  most  Europeans  ; hence  the  proverb,  which  is  used 
by  a man  when  he  is  waked  out  of  his  sleep  to  eat,  Kia 
wctkaoho  koe  i taku  moe,  ko  te  Watutureiarua  — “ When 
you  disturb  my  sleep,  let  it  be  on  account  of  the  arrival  of 
te  Watutureiarua/-’  the  first  person  who  made  bread  from 
the  hinau . 

The  natives  sometimes  cooked  it  by  pouring  a quantity  of 
the  flour  into  water  which  had  been  heated  by  putting  hot 
stones  into  it,  the  only  way  they  formerly  had  of  boiling 
water ; in  that  state  it  was  called  rerepi. 


MAORI  WEAPONS. 


TAMIHANA  TARAPIPI,  CHIEF  OF  MATAMATA,  A TRUE  PATRIOT. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

HONGI. 

One  of  the  most  celebrated  of  the  New  Zealand  Chiefs,  who 
has  lived  since  we  became  acquainted  with  the  country,  was 
Hongi,  a principal  man  of  the  Nga-puhi  tribe.  Mr.  Marsden 
met  with  him  during  his  first  visit  to  the  Bay  of  Islands,  in 
1814;  he  described  him  then  as  a warrior,  but  of  a very 
mild  disposition,  and  with  little  appearance  of  the  savage 
about  him,  he  was  the  chief  of  seventeen  places,  but  chiefly 
resided  at  the  Keri  Keri,  of  an  ingenicfhs  turn  of  mind,  and 
extremely  anxious  to  learn  European  arts ; at  Mr.  Marsden’s 
request,  he  made  a bust  of  himself,  his  only  instrument  being 
a piece  of  an  old  iron  hoop ; on  this  he  delineated  his  own 


510 


HONGI. 


moho  (tattoo),  it  was  sent  to  the  Church  Mission-house, 
where  it  is  still  preserved,  and  is,  indeed,  a very  creditable 
performance.* 

On  Mr.  Marsden's  return  to  New  South  Wales,  Hongi  and 
several  other  Chiefs  accompanied  him  ; he  remained  in  the 
colony  until  the  end  of  the  year  1815,  when  he  returned 
home,  and  became  the  firm  protector  of  the  Missionaries, 
frequently  throwing  himself  between  them  and  death  ; in 
other  respects,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  distinguished 
himself  particularly,  until  1820,  when,  with  another  young 
Chief  named  Waikato,  a near  relative,  he  accompanied  Mr. 
Kendal  to  England  ; whilst  there,  he  resided  several  months 
with  his  companion  at  Cambridge,  to  be  near  Professor  Lee, 
who  then  drew  up  the  New  Zealand  Grammar,  which  bears 
his  name ; the  part  of  the  town  where  he  resided  has  ever 
since  been  called  New  Zealand.  Hongi  said,  “ They  had 
come  to  London  to  see  the  King,  the  multitude  of  his  people, 
what  they  were  all  doing,  and  the  goodness  of  their  land. 
They  wished  to  remain  in  England  one  month,  and  then 
return  home;  they  desired  to  take  back  with  them  one 
hundred  men  : miners,  to  search  for  iron,  blacksmiths,  car- 
penters, and  Missionaries,  to  teach  them  the  arts  and  religion 
in  their  own  tongue;  they  were  anxious  to  have  twenty 
British  soldiers,  and  three  officers  to  keep  them  in  order ; 
they  would  protect  them,  and  grant  them  plenty  of  land.” 
Such  were  the  words  of  Hongi  and  Waikato. 

Great  interest  was  taken  in  tbe  visit  of  those  Chiefs, 
their  finely  tattooed  faces  excited  general  attention.  George 
the  Fourth  honored  them  with  an  interview ; he  showed 
them  the  armoury  of  his  palace,  and  presented  them  with  a 
complete  suit  of  armour,  double-barrelled  guns,  and  many 
other  valuable  articles ; whilst  Waikato  coveted  everything 
he  saw,  Hongi  only  admired  the  discipline  of  the  troops,  the 
different  weapons  of  war,  the  coat  of  mail  which  had  been 
given  him,  and  the  great  elephant.  The  King  had  a many 
things  purchased,  which  he  thought  Hongi  would  prize, 
especially  some  fine  looking-glasses,  these  were  arranged  in 

* See  page  317. 


HONGI. 


511 


a room  of  the  palace,  which  he  was  taken  to  see ; when  he 
beheld  the  looking-glasses,  he  said  to  the  King,  what 
are  all  these  glasses  for,  to  multiply  shadows,  when  he  had 
plenty  of  real  men  ? he  did  not  want  such  things  ; his 
bearing  and  deportment  was  extremely  dignified,  when 
treated  as  a great  man,  he  assumed  the  manner  of  a prince ; 
but  when  only  regarded  as  an  object  of  curiosity,  he  never 
failed  to  show  his  disgust,  and  even  indignation ; a striking 
instance  of  this  occurred  at  a gentleman's  house,  where  a 
large  party  had  been  invited  to  meet  the  Chiefs ; Hongi  had 
assumed  all  the  airs  of  a superior,  and  acted  the  prince, 
which  he  well  knew  how  to  do,  until  he  observed  some  ladies 
evidently  tracing  the  lines  on  his  tattooed  face,  whilst  a smile 
played  on  their  own,  which  he  thought  implied  a feeling  of 
pity  towards  himself ; immediately  he  arose  in  a state  of  great 
excitement,  threw  himself  across  three  chairs,  and  covering 
his  face  with  his  hands,  remained  in  that  position  until  the 
company  left.*  These  Chiefs  met  with  many  kind  friends, 
who  made  them  liberal  presents  of  arms  and  amunition,  as 
injudiciously  as  the  King,  who  little  thought  what  miseries, 
murders,  and  enormities,  they  were  thus  giving  rise  to. 

As  winter  approached,  Hongi  was  seized  with  an  affection 
of  the  chest,  which  reduced  him  to  a very  precarious  state  ; 
a blister  was  recommended,  which  for  a long  time  he  would 
not  suffer  to  be  applied,  but  when  it  was  at  last,  and  yielded 
him  speedy  relief,  he  said  he  would  not  quit  the  country  until 
he  was  supplied  with  a pot  full  of  that  valuable  medicine ; 
when  they  were  sufficiently  restored  to  health,  the  Govern- 
ment granted  them  a passage  to  New  South  Wales.  On 
their  arrival  in  Sydney,  they  disposed  of  the  more  useful 
gifts  received  from  their  Christian  friends,  such  as  tools, 
implements  of  agriculture,  and  with  the  proceeds  enlarged 
their  stock  of  gunpowder  and  shot ; whilst  they  remained  in 
the  colony,  they  took  up  their  abode  at  the  house  of  Mr. 
Marsden,  where  they  met  with  Hinaki  and  another  chief, 
who  had  taken  their  passage  to  London.  Mr.  Marsden 
having  perceived  the  bad  effect  Hongi' s visit  had  produced, 
* S Life  of  Rev.  S.  Leigh , p.  124. 


512 


HONGI. 


in  fixing  his  desires  upon  war,  as  a means  of  acquiring  the 
power  longed  for  to  make  him  a great  man  like  King 
George,  dissuaded  Hinaki  from  proceeding  there,  and 
hearing  how  very  ill  Hongi  had  been,  he  at  once  complied 
with  his  wish,  and  agreed  to  return  to  New  Zealand  with 
Hongi  and  Waikato,  whilst  they  were  all  thus  living  together 
under  Mr.  Marsdeffis  hospitable  roof,  Hongi  gave  the  first 
intimation  of  his  savage  disposition.  Hinaki  was  a Chief 
from  the  Thames,  Hongi  told  him  one  day  that  he  had  heard 
one  of  his  people  had  been  killed  by  some  of  the  Thames 
tribes,  and  he  must  have  satisfaction ; then,  thrusting  out 
his  tongue  and  distorting  his  countenace,  he  said  with  a con- 
temptuous sneer,  “ Make  haste  home,  put  your  pa  in  a state 
of  defence,  for  as  soon  as  I can  assemble  my  people  I shall 
fight  you in  vain  did  Hinaki  try  to  persuade  him  to  make 
peace  ; they  sat  at  the  same  table,  slept  under  the  same  roof, 
and  sailed  in  the  same  ship,  no  one  would  have  supposed  they 
were  enemies ; Hinaki,  finding  Hongi  was  in  earnest,  and 
that  there  was  no  prospect  of  peace,  hastened  home,  and 
assembled  all  his  forces  to  resist  the  invader,  who  having 
given  his  enemy  time  to  prepare,  soon  made  his  appearance 
at  the  head  of  three  thousand  men,  determined  to  turn  the 
deadly  gifts  he  had  received  to  account,  without  loss  of 
time ; although  the  tribe  he  went  to  attack  was  related  to 
his  own,  still  the  pleasure  of  trying  the  efficacy  of  his  mili- 
tary stores  prevailed  over  every  other  feeling  : the  battle, 
however,  was  for  a long  time  doubtful.  Hinaki  was  a man 
of  noble  form,  and  determined  courage,  and  though  fighting 
on  unequal  terms,  he  still  maintained  the  combat,  until 
Hongi,  arranging  his  men  in  the  form  of  a wedge,  and 
placing  himself  at  the  apex,  directed  his  men  to  wheel  down 
to  the  right  or  left,  according  to  circumstances  : at  last  he 
shot  Hinaki,  who  did  not  fall  until  he  had  received  four 
balls ; his  savage  conqueror  rushed  forward,  and  with  his 
English  clasp-knife  scooped  out  the  eye  of  his  expiring 
enemy,  and  instantly  swallowed  it,  he  then  stabbed  him  in 
the  neck,  and  drank  his  warm  blood,  as  it  gushed  forth  from 
the  wound. 


HONGI. 


513 


Hinaki  had  two  brothers,  who  were  both  likewise  killed, 
one  being  nearly  as  noble  a looking  person  as  himself ; the 
other  a youth  of  about  twenty,  their  bodies  were  eaten,  and 
their  heads  embalmed  as  trophies  of  victory,  about  one 
thousand  men  were  slain,  and  three  hundred  cooked. and 
eaten  on  the  battle-field,  so  complete  was  the  victory, 
that  the  place  has  never  since  been  inhabited ; it  now  be- 
longs to  the  Bishop’s  college,  being  part  of  its  endowment. 
Hongi  then  returned  to  the  Bay,  each  canoe  was  filled  with 
captives,  and  had  several  heads  of  their  enemies  placed 
at  the  stems  and  sterns  by  way  of  ornament ; Hongi  had 
twenty  prisoners  on  board  his  canoe,  intended  to  be  re- 
tained as  slaves  ; but  his  daughter,  who  had  lost  her 
husband  in  the  fight,  with  dishevelled  locks,  rushed  down 
to  the  water’s  edge,  as  the  canoe  touched  the  shore,  and 
seizing  the  sword  presented  to  her  father  by  the  King’s  own 
hand,  jumped  on  board,  and  smote  off  sixteen  heads  of  the 
poor  captives,  who,  without  a murmur,  placed  their  necks 
over  the  side-board  of  the  canoe.*  Twenty  more  were  also 
killed  and  eaten ; and  yet  the  frantic  woman,  not  thinking 
that  the  shade  of  her  husband  was  sufficiently  appeased  with 
this  sacrifice,  went  into  the  bush  with  a loaded  musket,  and 
there  shot  herself,  the  ball  however  only  passing  through 
her  arm  instead  of  her  head,  she  was  still  alive  when  found, 
but  determined  to  accompany  her  husband  to  the  Reinga, 
she  afterwards  strangled  herself. 

Hongi  had  no  sooner  finished  one  expedition  than  he  pre- 
pared for  another,  he  quickly  assembled  a thousand  men, 
and  proceeded  with  them  to  Mercury  Bay,  to  make  war 
upon  the  tribes  of  that  district,  ordering  another  army  of 
two  thousand  more  to  be  raised,  and  follow  him ; success 
again  attended  his  arms,  and,  flushed  with  victory,  he  next 
attacked  Kaipara,  where  he  made  great  slaughter.  In  1821 
Hongi  was  at  the  Totara,  a pa  at  the  mouth  of  the  Thames ; 
the  place  was  so  strong  that  the  Ngapuhi  feared  to  attack 
it.  They  pretended  friendship  and  were  admitted  within, 

* An  eye  witness  related  this  horrid  butchery  to  me, — Mr.  Puckey,  of  Kai- 
tara,  one  of  our  Catechists. 


514 


HONGI. 


though  the  inhabitants  were  warned  by  one  saying,  Kiatu- 
pato,  they  trusted  the  insidious  foe ; that  night  the  pa  was 
taken,  and  one  thousand  of  the  nga-ti-maru  killed.  In 
1822,  he  again  visited  the  Thames,  and  sailing  up  the  Ta- 
rn aki  attacked  and  carried  two  pas,  Mauinena  and  Mokoia, 
which  were  situated  close  to  each  other  near  Panmure  ; 
many  were  slain  and  some  fled,  then  dragging  his  canoes 
over  the  Otahuhu  Isthmus,  crossing  the  Manukau,  he  again 
drew  them  from  the  Waiuku  into  the  Awaroa ; one  of  his 
great  canoes  was  stopped  by  a sudden  bend  in  the  narrow 
stream,  he  had  therefore  to  dig  a direct  channel  for  it  to 
proceed  which  still  remains ; ascending  the  Waikato  and 
Waipa,  he  reached  Mataki  taki,  where  many  had  fled  for 
fear  of  him,  the  pa  was  stormed,  and  as  he  entered  on 
one  side  the  poor  natives  fled  by  the  other,  men,  women, 
children,  all  rushed  down  the  steep  parepare,  and  falling 
into  it  by  the  pressure  of  those  behind,  the  trench  was 
literally  filled  up  with  their  bodies,  a thousand  were  said 
to  have  there  perished;  from  the  Waipa,  Hongi  penetrated 
nearly  as  far  as  the  Wanganui;  in  this  expedition  he  slew 
fifteen  hundred  of  his  enemies. 

In  1823,  he  attacked  Rotorua,  conveying  his  canoes  by 
water  as  far  as  possible,  and  then  dragging  them  by  a road 
he  had  cut  through  the  forest  to  the  lake ; here  again  he 
was  victorious,  and  slew  many.  He  continued  every  year 
his  hostile  raids,  first  to  one  part  and  then  another,  always 
with  success,  his  name  spread  terror  wherever  he  went ; in 
fact,  he  became  the  Napoleon  of  New  Zealand,  and  declared 
when  remonstrated  with  by  the  Missionaries,  that  he  would 
not  desist  until  he  had  subjected  the  entire  island  to  his 
control ; that  as  England  had  but  one  King,  so  likewise 
there  should  be  only  one  in  New  Zealand ; but  as  there  is  a 
bound  to  all  human  glory,  “ Hither  shalt  thou  go  and  no 
further/*  so  it  was  with  Hongi,  he  fulfilled  the  Scripture  : 
u He  that  taketh  the  sword,  shall  perish  by  the  sword/' 

In  1827,  he  declared  war  against  Tara,  better  known  by 
the  name  of  George,  given  him  by  the  sailors,  he  was  the 
chief  of  the  tribe  which  massacred  the  crew  of  the  Boyd , 


HONGI. 


515 


making  that  an  excuse  for  his  ambitious  designs.  In  the 
beginning  of  1827  Hongi  plundered  and  burned  the  Wes- 
leyan Station,  which  had  been  commenced  at  Wangaroa 
a year  or  two  before ; he  told  the  Missionaries,  “ Your 
Chiefs  have  fled ; all  the  people  have  left  the  place,  and  you 
will  be  stripped  of  all  your  property  before  noon ; therefore, 
instantly  begone  ! 99 

It  appears,  however,  as  if  this  were  to  be  the  termination 
of  his  success ; his  only  redeeming  act  had  been  the  preser- 
vation of  those  who  came  to  raise  his  countrymen  ; — imme- 
diately he  put  forth  his  hand  to  injure  them,  he  fell ! On 
his  way  to  Wangaroa  the  usual  incantations  were  had  re- 
course to,  his  tohunga  inspected  the  liver  of  birds,  but  the 
omens  were  unfavorable,  all  prognosticated  evil,  so  that 
Hongi' s wife  advised  him  to  proceed  no  further,  but  he  was 
not  to  be  frightened  by  such  things ; even  his  superstitious 
feelings  could  not  restrain  him,  he  went  and  encamped  before 
the  pa.  After  seizing  all  the  enemy's  canoes,  who,  alarmed, 
privately  retired,  the  pa  was  taken  possession  of,  and  the  re- 
treating enemy  followed  and  overtaken  in  a wood  between 
the  Hokianga.  and  Wangaroa.  He  killed  or  dispersed 
“ the  man-eating  tribes,"  as  he  termed  those  who  cut 
off  the  Boyd,  although  the  epithet  was,  perhaps,  far  more 
applicable  to  himself,  for  he  appears  to  have  surpassed  all 
who  had  gone  before  him  in  the  number  of  human  bodies 
he  and  his  followers  had  devoured,  twenty  only  of  “ those 
man-eaters 39  escaped ; they  glutted  themselves  with  the 
slain,  sparing  neither  woman,  nor  even  child ; the  remnant 
of  his  enemies  fled  to  Hunahuna,  a village  near  the  Maunga- 
muka,  where  they  made  a stand,  Hongi,  who  had  ensconced 
himself  behind  a tree,  stepped  forward  to  take  aim,  when  a 
ball  struck  him : it  broke  his  collar-bone,  passed  in  an 
oblique  direction  through  his  right  breast,  and  came  out  a 
little  below  the  shoulder-blade,  close  to  the  spine.  This 
terminated  his  fearful  career,  for  though  he  lingered  a full 
year,  the  wound  never  healed,  when  he  breathed,  the  air 
escaped  through  the  orifice  with  a hissing  sound,  which  he 
made  a subject  of  merriment. 


l l 2 


516 


HONGI. 


He  received  his  wound  in  January,  1827.  On  the  6th  of 
March,  1828,  the  life  of  this  remarkable  savage  terminated. 
In  his  last  hours,  so  far  from  attending  to  the  words  of  the 
Missionaries,  he  urged  his  followers  to  prosecute  the  war,  and 
exterminate  his  enemies ; when  Patuone  visited  him,  a day 
or  two  before  his  death,  and  was  told  he  was  dying,  he  said, 
u Ho,  I am  not  dying,  my  heart  is  quite  light,  I am  not 
dying.”  The  next  day  he  fainted,  and  was  supposed  to  be 
dead,  when  he  revived,  he  said  he  should  die,  but  not  until 
the  morrow ; he  ordered  his  powder  to  be  brought  to  him, 
and  when  he  saw  it,  said  to  his  children,  Ka  ora  Icoutou, — 
you  will  be  safe,  intimating  the  powder  would  be  their 
protection ; he  then  summoned  his  sons,  gave  the  coat  of 
mail  he  had  received  from  the  King  of  England  to  one  of 
them,  and  divided  his  battle-axes  and  fire-arms  amongst 
them,  sternly  demanding,  “ Who  will  dare  to  attack  my 
followers  after  I am  gone  ? ” Early  next  morning,  though 
evidently  sinking  fast,  he  continued  to  rally  his  friends,  and 
said,  No  matter  from  what  quarter  your  enemies  come,  let 
them  be  ever  so  many,  should  they  come  here  hungry  for 
you,  Ida  toa , Jda  toa , be  brave,  be  brave  ! thus  will  you 
revenge  my  death,  and  thus  only  do  I wish  to  be  revenged. 
He  continued  repeating  these  words  until  he  expired. 

Patuone,  as  soon  as  he  heard  that  Hongi  was  dead,  bid  his 
followers  sit  still,  whilst  he  and  a few  of  his  friends  went  to 
see  the  corpse,  lest  Hongi*  s people  should  be  alarmed,  as  they 
had  blockaded  all  the  entrances  to  the  pa ; at  first  he  was 
refused  permission  to  enter,  until  Hunaroa  interfered;  he 
found  one  of  his  sons  binding  him  up,  his  head  still  reclining 
on  his  breast ; when  the  body  was  fully  dressed,  and  his  head 
richly  ornamented  with  feathers,  all  the  obsequies  due  to  so 
great  a Chief  were  performed  ; his  family,  fearing  an  attack, 
wished  to  bury  him  at  once,  but  Patuone  said,  Why  all  this 
haste  ? you  will  be  the  first  to  bury  your  father  alive  : let 
him  smell  before  you  bury  him  : what  if  he  does  smell  ? 
Yielding  to  this  advice,  he  laid  in  state  for  two  more  days, 
which  were  spent  in  repeating  the  jpihi,  or  funeral  ode,  in 
cutting  themselves,  crying,  and  firing  off  guns  ; in  the  mean- 


TAREHA. 


517 


time,  Hongi’s  friends  arrived  from  the  Bay  of  Islands,  who, 
with  the  Hokianga  natives,  formed  a large  procession,  when 
this  savage  warrior’s  'remains  were  carried  to  the  wahi  tajpvb 
— sacred  place,  amidst  the  mingled  din  of  the  maemae , or 
funeral  dance,  the  dismal  tangi,  or  wail  for  the  dead,  and 
peals  of  musketry,  an  apt  termination  for  the  life  of  one 
whose  supreme  delight  was  war,  and  to  whose  ear  the  dying 
groans  of  his  enemies  were  the  sweetest  music.* 

Tareha  was  a great  Nga-puhi  Chief,  residing  at  the  Bay  of 
Islands,  and  one  of  the  largest  specimens  of  the  savage,  being 
nearly  seven  feet  high,  and  stout  in  proportion,  his  breasts 
stood  out  with  fatness,  more  like  those  of  a female  than  of  a 
man  ; his  eyes  also  were  remarkably  prominent,  and  his  voice 
extremely  gruff ; he  seldom  wore  any  clothing  above  his  loins, 
and  when  seated,  appeared  like  a huge  mass  of  flesh ; in  his 
younger  days  he  was  celebrated  for  his  courage,  cruelty,  and 
cannibal  propensities  ; yet  through  the  influence  of  Hongi, 
he  was  always  a friend  and  protector  of  the  Missionaries, 
although  he  paid  no  attention  to  them  as  teachers,  and  lived 
and  died  a savage ; on  one  occasion,  when  he  was  going  to 
put  a female  slave  to  death  for  something  she  had  done,  close 
to  Mr.  King’s  house,  he  naturally  remonstrated  with  him, 
and  endeavoured  to  hinder  him  from  perpetrating  the  murder, 
the  savage  could  not  silence  his  determined  adversary,  neither 
did  he  wish  to  injure  him,  but  at  last,  losing  all  patience,  he 
seized  the  poor  Missionary,  who  was  not  a very  large  person, 
and  putting  him  under  his  arm,  walked  off  with  him  to  the 
Mission-house,  where  he  safely  deposited  him,  shutting  the 
door,  and  bidding  Mrs.  King  take  care,  and  not  let  him  go 
out  again,  lest  he  should  eat  him  also  ;f  on  another  occasion, 
one  of  his  runaway  slaves  took  refuge  in  the  Mission -house, 
at  the  Kerikeri,  there  Tareha  went,  and,  in  apparent  fury, 
threatened  to  kill  him  at  once,  the  poor  fellow  thought  his 
last  moment  was  come,  and  trembled  like  an  aspen  leaf. 

* See  Life  of  Rev.  S.  Leigh , p.  408. 

f His  first  salutation  to  the  writer  on  his  arrival  was  feeling  his  arm,  and 
saying,  in  a gruff  voice,  you  will  not  do  yet. 


518 


TAREHA. 


Mr.  Kemp  went  to  the  Chief,  entreating  him  to  spare  the 
slave's  life,  but  seemingly  to  no  purpose  ; he  placed  in  the 
Chief's  hand,  which  he  was  holding  behind  him,  a little  to- 
bacco; this  did  not  appease  him,  he  raged  still  more  violently, 
shaking  his  hand  as  an  intimation  that  it  was  not  enough, 
threatening  to  kill  him  at  once ; the  poor  slave  trembled, 
Mr.  Kemp  then  added  a shirt  as  a companion  to  the  tobacco ; 
this  was  also  insufficient,  his  hand  still  shaking  for  more,  and 
his  threats  increasing ; at  last,  he  gave  a blanket,  immedi- 
ately he  felt  this  in  his  hand,  his  wrath  subsided,  his  tone 
changed,  and  he  not  only  granted  his  pardon,  but  bestowed 
the  youth  upon  him  ; on  another  occasion,  when  some  of  our 
Missionaries  where  going  up  the  Kerikeri  river,  they  were 
struck  with  sounds  of  lamentation ; on  landing,  they  found 
that  Tareha  had  got  a fish-bone  in  his  throat,  and  was  choking, 
being  tapu , no  one  dared  come  near  or  touch  his  sacred  head ; 
but  one  of  the  Missionaries  immediately  approached,  and 
fortunately  having  a pair  of  scissors  with  him,  after  some 
difficulty,  managed  to  extract  the  bone ; in  about  half-an- 
hour,  the  Chief  had  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  able  to  speak ; 
and  to  the  amazement  of  the  kind  operator,  who  had  thus,  in 
all  probability,  saved  his  life,  his  first  words  were  a command 
to  his  followers  to  seize  the  scissors  as  a payment  for  having 
touched  his  sacred  throat,  the  Missionary,  however,  managed 
to  retain  possession  of  them,  although  they  had  thus  been 
forfeited  by  the  law  of  tapu. 

On  another  occasion,  a boat's  crew  went  up  what  is  called 
Tareha's  River,  to  cut  wood,  leaving  one  man  to  take  care  of 
the  boat,  and  get  food  cooked  for  the  party  on  their  return ; 
the  man  commenced  with  gathering  two  baskets  full  of 
oysters ; he  had  no  sooner  done  so,  than  up  came  Tareha, 
who  in  his  fierce  gruff  voice,  demanded  his  business  there,  at 
least  so  the  man  supposed,  being  totally  ignorant  of  the  lan- 
guage ; but  knowing  what  a dreadful  cannibal  he  was,  and  how 
completely  he  was  in  his  power,  he  told  me  he  trembled  in 
every  joint,  thinking  his  last  moments  had  arrived;  Tareha 
repeated  his  savage  growl  in  a louder  tone ; the  man  think- 
ing perhaps  it  was  the  cry  of  hunger,  thrust  before  him  one 


TAREHA. 


519 


of  the  oysters  he  had  just  opened ; Tareha  swallowed  it,  and 
gave  another  growl ; the  poor  fellow  hastily  opened  another, 
which  was  immediately  swallowed,  and  succeeded  by  a growl ; 
thus  he  kept  opening  oysters,  which  the  other  as  quickly 
devoured,  until  the  whole  stock  was  almost  consumed,  when 
he  was  opportunely  rejoiced  with  the  sight  of  his  returning 
comrades ; this  man,  many  years  afterwards,  told  me  the 
tale,  and  said  he  never  should  forget  his  horror  at  the  sight 
of  that  huge  savage,  and  the  sound  of  his  fearful  voice. 

In  after  times,  when  his  cannibal  feasts  were  well  nigh 
terminated,  and  he  himself  pretty  well  advanced  in  years,  a 
whale  was  announced  as  having  been  thrown  up  on  the  coast 
near  his  abode;  the  news  reached  him  on  a Saturday  evening, 
and  fearful  lest  the  dainty  dish  should  be  consumed  by  others, 
he  gave  notice,  as  the  next  day  was  the  Sabbath,  he  should 
go  and  guard  it  himself,  that  no  one  should  have  any  of  it 
until  the  Monday ; I had  the  curiosity  to  go  and  see  the  huge 
fish,  I found  Tareha  encamped  close  to  it,  and  a large 
assembly  of  natives  a little  further  off,  patiently  waiting,  I 
suppose,  until  the  lion  had  taken  his  share,  and  although  he 
would  not  allow  others  to  partake  of  it  during  the  Sabbath, 
I found  he  had  devoured  an  entire  fin  himself,  when  I paid 
my  visit,  he  was  eating  potatoes,  and  squeezing  a large  lump 
of  blubber  over  them  as  a relish,  the  putrid  oil  quite  tainting 
the  air.* 

This  Chief  died  a heathen,  but  his  son  Te  Akira,  who  was 
also  of  large  proportions,  was  afterwards  baptized  by  the 
name  of  “King  William.” 

* The  natives  were  not  so  susceptible  of  smell  as  we  are.  In  their  savage 
state,  putrid  substances  did  not  appear  to  be  nauseous  to  them,  but  they  become 
so  as  they  are  more  civilized,  and  assimilated  to  us  in  liviug.  So  also,  in 
their  natural  state,  they  have  a peculiar  odour,  which  is  very  perceptible  to 
sensitive  nostrils,  this  appears  common  to  all,  however  cleanly  in  their  habits, 
the  same  has  been  remarked  of  the  American  Indians ; and  it  is  singular,  that 
the  Christians  of  the  mediaeval  ages,  thought  that  the  Infidels  or  Saracens  had 
a similar  smell,  and  still  more,  that  they  should  have  pleaded  guilty  to  the 
charge ; and  further,  have  entertained  the  same  idea  as  the  Christians,  that 
it  was  lost  by  baptism.*  Early  travellers  in  the  Holy  Land  make  frequent 
mention  of  Saracens  bringing  their  children  to  be  baptized,  for  this  wholesome 

* See  Early  Travellers  in  the  Holy  Land. — Bohn’s  Library. 


520 


TE  HEUHEU. 


MONUMENT  OF  TE  HEUHEU  AT  TAUPO. 


Of  all  the  New  Zealand  Chiefs , there  has  not  been  a more 
distinguished  one  than  Te  Heuheu,  the  ariki  of  Taupo,  and 
the  most  influential  native  in  the  interior  of  the  island. 
His  noble  figure  (for  he  stood  upwards  of  six  feet  high),  his 
broad  chest,  good-natured  countenance,  white  locks,  dignified 
manner,  as  he  sat  on  a rock  in  front  of  his  house,  like  a 
king  on  his  throne,  surrounded  by  his  tribe,  surveying  his 
dependents  at  their  work,  to  whom  he  repeatedly  issued  his 
commands  in  a tone  which  compelled  obedience,  presented 
altogether  a perfect  picture  of  the  savage  Chief.  His  great 
bravery  in  war,  eloquence  in  council,  perfect  acquaintance 
with  the  mythology  of  the  country,  and  being  a tohunga  as 
well,  tended  to  extend  his  influence  amongst  the  New  Zealand 
tribes,  and  cause  them  to  view  him  as  a sacred  character. 

Though  successful  in  war,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  de- 
lighted in  it  so  much  as  his  countrymen  generally  did,  for 
he  was  never  averse  to  making  peace.  In  1844,  he  visited 
the  little  settlement  of  Wanganui  with  a war  party  of  about 
two  hundred,  intending  to  fight  with  the  Waitotara  tribe, 
and  avenge  the  death  of  Kotuku-rae-roa,  Tauteka,  and  Te 

purpose.  Baptism,  however,  does  not  appear  so  efficacious  in  New  Zealand. 
Hue,  in  his  travels  through  China,  also  alludes  to  this,  and  states  that  the 
Chinese  have  naturally  a strong  smell  of  musk. 


TE  HEUHEIT. 


521 


Wakarau,  great  Taupo  Chiefs  who  were  killed  there  three 
years  before ; but  being  reasoned  with,  and  recommended  to 
make  peace,  he  said  he  was  known  amongst  the  tribes  as 
a Chief  who  could  make  peace  as  well  as  war;  he  listened 
to  the  advice,  and  returned  with  his  war  party  without  doing 
any  injury,  although  the  town  was  then  in  his  power,  and  its 
inhabitants  possessed  no  means  of  defence.  A complaint  was 
made  against  one  of  his  men  for  stealing  a poor  man;s  coat ; 
at  that  moment  the  thief  approached  in  a canoe,  having 
on  the  stolen  coat.  Te  Heuheu  seeing  him,  rushed  upon 
him  like  a tiger,  threw  him  into  the  water,  and  held  him 
under  with  his  powerful  grasp,  until  he  was  nearly  drowned, 
and  then  pulled  the  coat  off  his  back  and  restored  it  to  the 
owner.  In  returning  home,  whilst  ascending  a path  to 
a pa  on  the  Wanganui  River,  he  stumbled  and  fell  on  his 
face,  this  his  followers  exclaimed  was  an  aitua  or  evil  omen, 
and  a sure  sign  of  death.  He  gave  another  proof  of  his 
natural  peaceable  disposition  by  erecting  a house  for  a neigh- 
bouring Chief,  with  whom  he  had  long  been  at  variance,  this 
was  one  of  the  noblest  specimens  of  native  architecture,  and 
when  finished,  had  the  expressive  name  given  it  of  “ Te  riri 
ha  ware  ware/’  the  burying  of  anger,  this  was  nearly  his  last 
work;  he  was  visited  by  ministers  of  various  denominations, 
but  though  all  were  received  with  great  respect,  he  yet  refused 
to  give  up  the  faith  of  his  forefathers,  and  when  one  exhorted 
him  to  be  a member  of  his  peculiar  Church,  he  is  reported 
to  have  said,  When  you  foreigners  tell  me  of  so  many 
different  roads,  and  each  affirms  his  own  to  be  the  only  true 
one,  how  can  I decide  ? first  agree  amongst  yourselves  which 
is  the  right  way,  and  then  I will  consider  whether  I shall 
take  it  or  not.  He,  however,  accompanied  the  writer  of  this 
sketch  to  see  the  most  lovely  part  of  the  vale  in  which 
he  lived,  and  said,  that  shall  be  tajou  as  a residence  for  a 
Missionary,  if  one  should  be  sent  him;  the  principal  abode  of 
this  Chief  was  at  Te  Rapa,  a small  valley  afc  the  south-west 
corner  of  the  Taupo  Lake;  his  house  was  a long  building, 
nearly  forty  feet  in  length;  it  resembled  an  eight-stalled 
stable,  each  compartment  being  occupied  by  one  of  his 


522 


TE  HEUHETJ. 


wives,  who  were  generally  employed  weaving  mats,  whilst  he 
sat  at  one  end  silently  regarding  their  labors.  Many  of  these 
garments  were  most  elaborated,  ornamented  with  embroidery, 
and  were  really  beautiful.  A passing  compliment  may  here 
be  paid  to  the  good  taste  the  ladies  displayed  in  their  way  of 
wearing  them,  and  their  various  fashions  of  dressing  the  hair, 
some  of  which,  it  appears,  our  English  ladies  have  conde- 
scended to  copy. 


MAORI  WAYS  OF  DRESSING  THE  HAIR. 


Iwikau,  the  fighting  chief  of  Taupo,  a younger  brother  of 
Te  Heuheu,  accompanied  his  taua,  or  war  party,  against 
Wanganui  in  1843,  and  crossed  over  to  the  Putiki  side 
to  plunder  the  potatoe  grounds ; the  natives  came  to  inform 
me  of  the  circumstance,  and  asked  whether  as  Christians 


I 


TE  HEUHETT. 


523 


they  should  allow  them  to  do  so,  I told  them  it  was  lawful 
to  defend  their  own  property,  but  they  had  better  remon- 
strate with  them  quietly;  and  say  they  did  not  wish  to  quar- 
rel. Mawae  said,  does  not  Scripture  say,  “when  thine 
enemy  hungers,  feed  him/’  therefore,  he  refused  to  allow 
them  to  go  away  hungry,  and  say  he  would  not  give  them 
food,  but  would  I accompany  them,  I agreed  to  do  so ; 
immediately  I found  myself  in  the  midst  of  a party  of  two 
hundred  armed  natives  ; we  marched  to  the  potatoe  grounds 
which  were  situated  in  a deep  valley,  a recently  formed 
waerenga,*  when  a singular  sight  presented  itself ; the 
valley  was  filled  with  men,  and  women  busily  engaged,  dig- 
ging up  potatoes,  and  filling  their  baskets  as  quickly  as 
possible,  whilst  on  the  other  side  a number  of  armed  men 
were  drawn  up  ready  to  defend  the  workers  if  opposed. 
Mawae,  our  chief,  a noble  looking  man,  jumped  upon  a large 
log  in  the  centre  of  the  cultivation,  and  twirling  his  gun 
round,  cried  out  in  a loud  tone,  listen  to  me,  you  shall  not 
say  I refused  food,  take  the  half  of  the  crop  as  far  as  this 
tree,  but  do  not  presume  to  dig  up  a single  potatoe  be- 
yond it,  or  I shall  fire.  They  went  on  digging  quietly, 
until  they  came  up  close  to  where  Mawae  was  standing,  and 
then  ceased ; whilst  this  was  being  done  I walked  over  to 
the  other  side,  and  spoke  to  Iwikau  and  his  men,  trying  to 
make  them  see  that  what  they  were  doing  was  wrong,  they 
were  very  polite,  but  when  the  digging  was  finished  they 
tied  up  their  ketes,  and  quietly  walked  away ; the  potatoes 
taken  were  far  more  than  required  for  themselves,  most 
of  them  were  sold  to  the  Europeans.  Some  years  after- 
wards, when  I paid  Iwikau  a visit,  he  inquired  if  I had 
forgotten  our  first  meeting  in  Mawae^s  potatoe  ground,  I 
said  I had  not  j he  then  told  me  it  was  his  intention,  had  a 
single  shot  been  fired,  to  have  immediately  seized  me  and 
carried  me  off  to  Taupo  as  a prisoner,  and  kept  me  there  to 
be  their  missionary.  I have  often  since  thought  what  might 
have  been  the  result  had  he  done  so. 

In  May,  1846,  a remarkable  accident  (already  alluded  to) 

* A forest  Clearing. 


524 


TE  HEUHEU. 


terminated  tlie  life  of  this  Chief,  as  well  as  those  of  his  wives, 
and  all  his  children  who  were  then  living  with  him,  together 
with  nearly  sixty  of  his  tribe.  An  unusually  rainy  season 
occasioned  a large  land  slip  on  the  side  of  the  Kakaramea, 
the  mountain  at  the  back  of  Te  Rapa,  about  two  miles' 
distance  from  his  residence;  this  took  place  nearly  two 
thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  lake,  at  the  gorge  of  a 
little  Alpine  valley,  through  which  a considerable  stream 
flowed,  which,  being  thus  dammed  up,  in  three  days  formed 
a large  and  deep  lake,  which  burst  its  barriers,  and  with 
irresistible  force,  swept  rocks,  trees,  and  earth  with  it  into 
the  lake ; the  little  settlement  was  buried  with  all  its  inha- 
bitants, excepting  a few  solitary  individuals,  who,  aroused 
from  their  sleep  by  the  warning  roar  of  the  approaching 
avalanche,  fled  to  the  neighbouring  hills  and  escaped ; one 
of  the  survivors  stated,  that  Te  Heuheu  arose  from  his  bed, 
(it  was  about  three  in  the  morning,)  and  exhorted  a Chief 
who  was  his  guest  to  flee,  but  he  refused  to  go  without  him, 
both  remained,  he  said  it  was  his  reptile  god,*  who  was 
angry  with  him  for  having  omitted  his  usual  offerings ; he, 
therefore,  immediately  made  one,  commenced  a supplicatory 
prayer  to  the  angry  god,  and  whilst  thus  engaged  was  over- 
whelmed; the  once  lovely  and  fruitful  valley  of  Te  Rapa  was 
buried,  in  many  places  more  than  twenty  feet  deep ; its 
houses  and  groves  were  swept  away,  and  nothing  left  to 
mark  that  it  had  once  been  the  abode  of  man,  but  a solitary 
swinging  pole,  called  a morere,  which,  with  a few  feet  of 
green  sward  around  it,  singularly  enough  escaped.  There 
are  traditions  of  two  previous  landslips  in  the  same  neigh- 
bourhood, one  at  Opotuka,  when  a hundred  persons  with 
their  houses  and  fences  disappeared  in  Rotoaira  Lake,  the 
other  at  Omohu,  a pa  near  Tokanu  not  far  from  Te  Rapa, 
when  the  pa,  with  one  hundred  and  forty  souls  in  it,  was 
swallowed  up. 

Te  Heuheu's  brother  caused  the  body  of  the  Chief  to  be 
exhumed;  nearly  one  hundred  natives  were  thus  employed, 
but  the  task  would  have  been  hopeless,  had  not  the  flood 

* A saurian,  supposed  to  reside  in  lakes,  rivers,  and  under  mountains. 


TE  HEUHEU. 


525 


formed  a deep  channel  near  his  house,  under  the  ruins  of 
which  he  was  found;  the  place  was  then  declared  tapu,  I went 
there,  however,  and  was  not  interferred  with,  and  read  the 
burial  service  over  the  sp'ot  where  the  pa  stood,  accompanied 
by  Wiremu  Tauri,  my  head  teacher,  even  then  the  mud  was 
so  soft  that  we  sunk  in  it  nearly  ancle  deep.  It  was  a solemn 
moment;  an  entire  village  laid  buried  beneath  us,  with  all 
its  inhabitants — the  young,  the  old,  the  infant,  and  the 
hoary-headed — all  in  one  awful  moment  were  deeply  en- 
tombed ; it  was  night  when  the  accident  occurred,  and  from 
one  sleep  they  passed  into  another — the  sleep  of  death. 

The  Chief  s body  was  kept  concealed,  according  to  the 
custom,  with  great  arikis,  for  about  four  years ; it  was  then 
exhumed,  and  laid  in  state,  dressed  in  the  finest  native 
garments,  and  placed  in  a highly-ornamented  coffin,  which 
was  supported  on  a pole,  until  1850,  when  it  was  privately 
conveyed  to  Tongariro,  with  the  intention  of  being  thrown 
down  the  crater  of  that  volcano;  but  the  difficulty  of  the 
ascent  had  not  been  sufficiently  considered,  and  the  bearers 
were  contented  to  leave  it  on  a ledge  of  rock,  which  projected 
from  the  side  of  the  mountain. 


A NATIVE  COMB,  HE  HEKU. 


HORI  KINGI  TE  ANAUA,  THE  WANGANUI  CHIEF  AND  FIRM  FRIEND  OF  THE 
EUROPEAN.- — 'Obit. , 1869. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 

Te  Rauparaha,  the  Chief  of  the  Nga-ti-raukawa,  was  born  at 
Maungatautari,  about  1770.  His  father,  in  one  of  the  con- 
stant wars  which  formerly  raged,  was  killed  and  eaten ; he 
was  then  a child  ; his  savage  conqueror  said,  that  if  his  infant 
son  fell  into  his  hands,  he  would  make  a fine  relish  for  his 
ran  joaraha,  which  is  a thick-leafed  convolvolus,  growing  on 
the  sand  hills  near  the  sea,  and  formerly  used  as  food ; Rau- 
paraha,  or  convolvolus  leaf,  therefore,  henceforth  became  his 
name. 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RAN Gi  IH AEATA . 


527 


When  he  grew  up  to  manhood,  he  manifested  such  a trou- 
blesome and  restless  disposition,  as  to  render  himself  an 
object  of  fear  and  dislike  to  his  neighbours,  and  even  to  his 
own  relatives ; this  feeling  was  increased  by  his  collecting 
around  him  a band  of  the  most  worthless  characters,  whose 
constant  excesses  became  at  last  so  intolerable,  that  his 
neighbours,  the  Ngarti-maniapoto,  aided  by  Te  Waharoa, 
their  ally,  arose,  and  forcibly  expelled  him  from  their  tribe. 

The  first  exploit  attributed  to  Te  Rauparaha,  was  his 
cutting  off  a Ngapuhi  Chief,  Waero,  with  one  hundred  and 
forty  of  his  followers,  on  Motu  Tawa,  a small  island  in  Roto 
Kakahi ; leaving  his  friends  there,  he  made  his  way  overland 
to  Taupo  and  Rotoaira ; the  people  of  Motuapuhi  sought  to 
kill  him,  but  one  of  the  Chiefs  became  his  friend,  and  hid 
him  in  a food-store,  until  he  could  make  his  escape ; he 
reached  the  Wanganui,  and  thence  returned  to  Kawhia, 
where  he  gained  the  aid  of  Tuwhare  and  his  tribe,  who 
thenceforth  assumed  the  command  until  his  death,  when  Rau- 
paraha  succeeded  him ; they  attacked  the  Taranaki  natives, 
and  took  their  stronghold,  Tapuanikau ; at  Tihoi  they  erected 
a pa,  and  remained  there  some  time ; on  reaching  the  Wan- 
ganui, they  encamped  at  the  heads  for  nearly  a month,  making 
moki,  or  canoes  of  the  raupo  leaf  at  Kokohuia ; they  then 
quickly  crossed  the  river,  and  attacked  the  natives  at  Purua ; 
the  pa  was  taken,  and  about  forty  men  killed.  Tuwhare  and 
his  party  proceeded  along  the  coast  as  far  as  Wairarapa, 
where  they  killed  the  Chief,  Rore. 

In  returning,  Tuwhare  noticed  the  wreck  of  a vessel,  which 
made  him  think  that  Cook's  Straits  would  eventually  become 
a place  of  great  resort  for  the  Europeans ; he  therefore  advised 
Te  Rauparaha  that  they  should  go  back  to  Kawhia,  and  raise 
as  large  a force  as  possible,  and  then  take  permanent  posses- 
sion of  the  Straits  ; hitherto  they  had  merely  destroyed  the 
pas,  for  the  sake  of  plunder ; Rauparaha  entered  into  the 
views  of  Tuwhare,  they  went  to  Kawhia,  and  having  there 
assembled  a great  number,  returned ; * on  reaching  Putiki 

* Andrew  Green  states  that  he  was  expelled  from  Kawhia  in  1828,  but  this 
cannot  be  correct. 


528 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


pa,  at  Wanganui,,  they  were  received  very  hospitably  by 
a few  women,  its  only  inhabitants,  their  husbands  being 
absent;  food  was  cooked  for  them;  afterwards  they  arose 
and  slew  their  entertainers,  and  then  pursued  their  journey 
south;  the  natives  hearing  of  their  coming,  removed  with 
their  property  inland.  The  party  took  up  their  abode 
at  Ohau,  and  there  murdered  some  of  the  Horowhenua 
natives ; this  was  the  commencement  of  the  war ; from 
his  post  at  Horowhenua,  Te  Rauparaha  made  repeated 
raids  against  Manawatu  ; the-  Horowhenua  natives  being 
ignorant  of  his  former  murders,  brought  him  presents  of 
food,  but  he  slew  the  bearers  of  them ; when  their  tribe, 
the  Moa  Upoko,  heard  of  his  treachery,  they  raised  a war 
party  of  three  hundred  men,  and  surprised  Rauparaha,  killing 
one  hundred  of  his  followers,  and  compelling  him  to  flee  to 
Waikanae ; the  Horowhenua  made  common  cause  with  the 
Nga  ti  apa,  who  came  and  fought  at  Waimea,  where  they 
slew  Huna,  the  Chief ; Te  Pehi  and  the  Ngatitoa  were  con- 
quered, and  they  lost  one  hundred  men.  The  daughter  also 
of  Pehi  was  killed  and  cooked';  her  body  was  carried  in  a 
taha,  a bark  basket,  to  Wanganui,  and  there  eaten.  Raupa- 
raha^s  own  gun  fell  into  their  hands,  being  taken  by  Paora, 
Turanga  pito. 

This  success  excited  the  hopes  of  Rauparaha^s  enemies  ; a 
force  of  three  thousand  men  went  against  him,  collected  from 
all  the  places  on  the  coast;  they  reached  Waimea,  the  scene 
of  their  former  success.  Turoa  gave  the  hatchet  to  Turanga 
pito,  to  go  and  murder  Te  Rauparaha  ; this  great  force,  how- 
ever, was  conquered  by  the  Hgatitoa  and  Ngatiawa ; the 
battle  was  fought  on  the  island  of  Kapiti.  Rangi  mairehau, 
the  Chief  of  Turakina,  went  to  Rangihaeata,  being  a relative 
of  his  by  marriage,  expecting  to  be  spared,  but  that  Chief 
cast  him  on  the  fire,  and  roasted  him  alive;  with  this  excep- 
tion, they  used  the  victory  with  moderation,  and  made  peace 
with  the  tribes  who  had  fought  against  them. 

Pehi  felt  deeply  the  loss  of  his  child,  and  determined  on 
taking  signal  revenge  ; but  to  do  it  effectually,  it  was  neces- 
sary to  have  a larger  supply  of  guns  and  ammunition ; for 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RAN GIHAEATA . 


529 


it  was  chiefly  by  their  guns  they  had  hitherto  prevailed — 
the  tribes  they  fought  with  not  having  any — yet  even  their 
supply  was  insufficient ; he  therefore  resolved  to  imitate 
Hungi,  and  go  to  England  ; shortly  after  the  battle,  a whal- 
ing vessel  came  to  Cookes  Straits ; Pehi  immediately  went 
on  board,  bidding  his  followers  paddle  back  and  leave  him 
there,  the  Captain  had  no  alternative  but  to  take  the  Chief 
on  with  him  to  England ; he  thus  secured  his  passage,  and 
was  enabled  to  gratify  the  ruling  desire  of  his  heart,  and 
obtain  fire-arms,  this  was  in  1824. 

From  that  time,  Rauparaha  and  his  restless  companions 
appear  to  have  been  constantly  at  war;  after  a series  of 
engagements,  he  entirely  destroyed  the  Moa  Upoko  tribe, 
and  took  possession  of  their  district ; a war  expedition  was 
undertaken  against  Wanganui ; finding  the  natives  prepared 
they  were  not  attacked,  he  returned  and  fought  with  the 
Nga  ti  apa,  at  Rangitikei ; encouraged  by  their  success  there, 
they  went  again  to  Wanganui,  and  fought  with  the  natives, 
when  one  of  the  Nga  te  rau  kawa  Chiefs  was  killed,  which 
made  Rauparaha  very  indignant. 

The  visits  of  vessels  now  became  more  frequent,  and  they 
gave  power  and  importance  to  Te  Rauparaha,  who  managed 
to  monopolize  the  entire  trade  with  them,  and  become  the 
sole  channel  by  which  others  obtained  supplies  of  Euro- 
pean goods  ; various  tribes  sent  him  presents  of  food.  Te 
Heuheu,  the  great  Chief  of  Taupo,  collected  a large  quantity 
of  provisions,  and  brought  them  to  him ; many  tribes,  of  their 
own  accord,  grew  food  for  his  use;  he  in  return  sent  them  pre- 
sents of  rum,  tobacco,  powder,  and  guns;  he  thus  continually 
increased  in  influence — all  but  Nga  ti  rua  nui  and  Taranaki, 
courted  his  alliance,  still  Rauparaha  continued  his  wars ; he 
sent  two  expeditions  against  Wanganui,  one  under  Watanui, 
who  fought  at  Rangipo,  and  there  Ega  ti  ruaka  fell.  Rau- 
paraha next  attacked  Putiki,  and  killed  many  of  its  inhabitants 
(some  of  their  bones  laid  whitening  on  its  plains  when  I first 
went  there,  which  I collected  and  buried)  ; to  revenge  this 
reverse,  Wanganui  raised  a war  party,  and  attacked  Pa 
Kakutu  ; a meteor  fell  into  it  whilst  they  were  fighting, 

M M 


530 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


which  was  coDsidered  such  a favorable  omen  for  the  besiegers, 
that  the  defenders  were  disheartened,  and  the  place  was  taken. 
Rauparaha  hemmed  in  on  every  side,  narrowly  escaped  being 
captured.  About  this  time,  Pehi  returned  from  England, 
having  obtained  from  the  thoughtless-  kindness  of  those  who 
there  saw  him,  a large  collection  of  guns  and  ammunition. 

Hekeringa,  a noble-looking  Chief,  who  was  celebrated  for 
his  very  fine  rnoho , had  gone  to  reside  at  Arapawa,  where 
he  was  murdered  by  the  Ngaitahu  ; being  a great  favorite 
of  Rangihaeata,  although  he  had  fled  on  account  of  his  not 
having  conducted  himself  with  propriety  towards  that  Chief's 
wives,  he  sought  satisfaction  for  his  death,  and  fought  with 
the  Ngaitahu,  killing  a great  number  of  them. 

Pehi  went  to  see  Tamai  hara  nui  at  the  Waharaupo,  where 
Hakitara,  a Ngapuhi  Chief,  with  a number  of  his  tribe,  was 
staying;  this  Chief  remembering  the  death  of  Wairo  at 
Rotokakahi,  persuaded  Tamai  hara  nui  to  let  them  murder 
Pehi,  as  a payment  for  it,  he  consented.  Pehi  and  forty  of 
his  companions,  all  great  Chiefs,  were  murdered,  although 
they  were  the  friends  of  Tamai  hara  nui,  and  then  his  guests. 
Rauparaha  himself  had  a very  narrow  escape,  he  was  pur- 
sued, and  finding  his  canoe  was  near  being  overtaken, 
having  rounded  a point  he  jumped  into  the  sea,  and  dived 
a considerable  distance,  then  coming  up  beneath  a mass  of 
floating  sea  weed,  he  remained  a long  time  with  only  his 
mouth  above  the  water,  until  his  baffled  pursuers  gave  up 
their  search,  he  safely  reached  Kapiti,  with  a full  determina- 
tion of  having  ample  revenge  for  those  treacherous  murders, 
and  circumstances  too  soon  gave  him  the  desired  opportunity. 

On  the  arrival  of  a vessel  called  the  Elizabeth,  commanded 
by  a fellow  named  Stewart,  who  came  to  trade  for  flax,  Te 
Rauparaha  offered  to  give  him  a full  cargo,  provided  he 
would  convey  him,  with  a hundred  of  his  followers,  to  Wa- 
haraupo ; influenced  by  the  hope  of  gain,  Stewart  lent  him- 
self as  an  instrument  to  accomplish  the  will  of  those  savages  ; 
they  embarked,  and  he  sailed  direct  to  the  abode  of  Tamai 
hara  nui ; the  Captain  sent  a youth  named  Cowell*  in  the 

* This  man  is  still  living  : he  married  a native  woman,  has  a large  family, 
and  resided  on  the  Waipa. 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


531 


boat  to  invite  him  on  board  and  see  his  cargo,  he  asked 
if  they  had  any  natives  with  them  in  the  ship,  and  was 
answered,  No ; they  had  come  direct  from  the  Bay.  Tamai 
hara  nui  remarked  a small  burr  (pirihahu)  sticking  to  their 
garments,  and  said,  How  came  it  there,  if  you  have  come  so 
far ; at  last,  however,  he  was  persuaded,  and  fell  into  the 
snare,  he  went  on  board,  and  was  taken  down  into  the 
Captain's  cabin ; the  natives  concealed  themselves  in  the 
hold.  When  Te  Hiko,  the  son  of  Pehi,  entered  the  cabin, 
he  stared  fixedly  at  Tamai  hara  nui,  for  nearly  half-an-hour, 
without  saying  a word  ; he  then  approached,  and  drew  back 
the  upper  lip  of  the  captive  Chief,  and  said,  those  are  the 
teeth  which  ate  my  father;  when  the  Chief  found  he  had 
been  inveigled  on  board,  and  thus  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
his  deadly  enemies,  he  sent  for  his  wife  and  daughter,  that,  as 
he  said,  he  might  not  go  to  the  B-einga  alone  : they  promptly 
obeyed,  and  came  on  board. 

During  the  night,  Tamai  hara  nui  strangled  his  daughter, 
a very  beautiful  girl,  that  she  might  not  be  a slave ; and 
Stewart,  horrified  at  this  unnatural  crime,  without  perceiving 
his  own  greater  one,  ordered  the  Chief  to  be  tied  up  and 
flogged,  which  act  offended  even  his  savage  captors,  who 
said  he  was  still  a Chief,  and  not  to  be  treated  as  a slave. 
The  following  day  Rauparaha  landed  his  men,  and  after  a 
brave  resistance,  the  pa  was  taken,  and  a great  number  were 
slaughtered ; they  returned  to  the  vessel,  laden  with  five 
hundred  baskets  of  human  flesh,  which  the  Captain  pro- 
fessed to  believe  was  only  pork  ; some  say,  that  much  of  it 
was  cooked  in  the  ship's  coppers,  and  it  is  not  improbable  it 
was  so,  as  the  vessel  Was  completely  in  the  hands  of  the 
natives,  this  however  was  denied  : at  any  rate,  the  vessel 
must  have  been  a regular  shambles  of  human  flesh,  and 
very  offensive  from  such  a quantity  being  on  board,  as  they 
were  four  days  in  reaching  Kapiti;  on  landing,  the  Chief 
Tamai  hara  nui  was  given  up  to  Te  Aia,  the  widow  of  Pehi, 
who  took  him,  with  his  wife  and  sister,  to  her  own  house, 
giving  up  half  to  their  use ; they  talked  so  friendly  to  one 
another,  and  she  behaved  so  kindly  to  him,  that  a stranger 

M M 2 


532 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


would  have  taken  them  for  man  and  wife  rather  than  a 
doomed  captive  with  his  implacable  enemy,  she  used  even  to 
clothe  him  in  her  finest  garments,  and  deck  his  head  with 
choice  feathers ; this  continued  for  about  two  weeks,  until 
either  she  had  assembled  her  friends,  or  thought  her  victim 
sufficiently  fat  for  killing,  she  then  suddenly  caused  him  to 
be  seized  and  bound,  with  his  arms  stretched  to  a tree,  and 
whilst  in  that  position,  took  a spear,  a long  narrow  rod  of 
iron,  with  which  she  stabbed  him  in  the  jugular  artery,  and 
drank  his  warm  blood  as  it  gushed  forth,  placing  her  mouth 
to  the  orifice ; he  was  afterwards  cooked  and  eaten. 

Stewart  received  twenty-five  tons  of  flax  for  this  infamous 
service,  the  price  of  blood,  and  might  have  had  more,  but 
he  would  not  stay  for  it ; a captain  of  some  vessel,  then  also 
at  Kapiti,  who  is  said  to  have  been  but  little  better,  sailed 
before  him,  and  carried  the  news  to  Sydney,  so  that  on  his 
arrival  there,  he  was  shunned,  and  styled  by  all — the  Cap- 
tain of  the  bloody  Elizabeth ; he  was  even  taken  up  and 
tried,  from  want  of  evidence,  however,  or  from  some  flaw 
in  the  indictment  he  escaped,  but  though  human  vengeance 
did  not  reach  him.  Divine  justice  did,  nothing  was  heard  of 
him  afterwards,  the  vessel  was  supposed  to  have  foundered  on 
its  way  to  Valparaiso,  and  all  on  board  to  have  perished. 

Tuteounuku,  the  son  of  Tamai  hara  nui,  too  weak  to  contend 
with  Te  Rauparaha  alone,  went  to  the  great  Chief  of  the  Ngai- 
tahu,  commonly  called  Bloody  Jack,  and  solicited  his  aid  to 
punish  the  murderers  of  his  parents ; the  Chief  thought  so  good 
a pretext  for  war  should  not  be  neglected ; a large  force  was 
therefore  speedily  raised,  and  a suitable  opportunity  soon 
occurred,  when  Rauparaha  was  busily  engaged  snaring 
the  putangi  tangi  (Paradise  ducks)  at  Kaparatehau  Lake, 
with  a party  of  his  tribe,  having  all  their  canoes  drawn 
up  high  on  the  beach,  except  one ; the  enemy  came  upon 
them  so  suddenly,  that  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty 
Rauparaha  and  about  forty  men,  women,  and  children  es- 
caped to  the  canoe,  and  pushed  off,  all  the  rest  were  slain ; 
but  being  encumbered  with  so  many,  they  made  little  way. 
Rauparaha,  therefore,  compelled  about  half  the  number  to 


TE  RATJPARAHA  AND  RAN GIHAEATA. 


533 


jump  overboard,  and  those  who  refused  were  thrown  into 
the  sea  by  force,  the  canoe,  thus  lightened,  made  way,  and 
though  hotly  pursued,  escaped,  and  reached  Kapiti ; but 
this  restless  Chief  must  have  his  revenge,  he  therefore, 
lost  no  time  in  raising  a force,  he  visited  the  Nga  ti  awa,  and 
solicited  their  aid,  which  was  given,  they  immediately  em- 
barked, and  sailed  for  the  Karaka,  adjoining  to  which  is  a 
bay  called  Orau  moa,  completely  shut  in  by  the  promontory 
Karaka  at  one  extremity,  and  by  another  at  the  other,  with 
lofty  cliffs  between,  there  Bloody  Jack,  with  the  Ngaitahu, 
were  encamped;  one  hundred  and  forty  of  the  Ngatiawa  let 
themselves  down  the  cliff,  but  were  all  cut  off.  In  the  morning 
Bloody  Jack  went  on  his  way,  and  Te  Bauparaha  did  not 
think  proper  to  follow  him  but  returned  to  Cloudy  Bay;  when 
Bloody  Jack  and  his  party  embarked,  the  canoe  of  Tute  ou 
nuku  was  capsized,  and  he  was  drowned,  all  the  rest  in  it 
however  were  saved  ; when  the  Chief  saw  them,  he  was  so 
indignant  because  they  could  save  themselves,  and  yet  suffer 
their  young  Chief  to  be  drowned,  that  he  killed  them  all. 

Puoho,  the  Chief  of  Nga-ti-tama,  and  Priest  to  Te  Baupa- 
raha,  conducted  a small  party  of  forty,  and  went  by  the 
West  Coast,  instead  of  the  Kaikoura,  to  war  with  the  people 
living  on  that  side,  his  road  was  by  Waka-tu  (Nelson)  : he 
reached  a small  place,  which  he  took,  killing  some  and 
putting  others  to  flight,  the  news  of  this  attack  was  carried 
to  Taiaroa,  the  head  Chief  of  the  place  ; he  and  Bloody  Jack 
lost  no  time  in  going  there  with  a party  of  about  a hundred, 
their  wish  was  not  to  kill  Puoho,  for  whom  they  had  a regard 
but  merely  to  take  him  prisoner,  and  spare  his  men  ; Puoho 
and  his  party  slept  in  two  houses,  but  he  himself  was  outside 
in  the  verandah  ; Taiaroa  told  his  men  to  try  and  capture 
him  alive,  Puoho,  however,  would  not  yield,  he  fought 
bravely  all  night  with  the  enemy,  at  last  one  got  upon 
a house,  and  shot  him,  hitherto  they  had  not  used  their 
guns,  wishing  to  save  them  all  alive.  When  this  was  done, 
Taiaroa  pulled  off  his  cap  and  threw  it  on  the  roof  of  the 
house  to  make  it  tapu,  and  said,  here  let  the  fight  cease,  and 
made  peace,  he  had  the  head  of  Puoho  cut  off  as  a mokai3  a 


534 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATL. 


sign  of  regard,  and  caused  his  body  to  be  buried  ; but  when 
they  left,  the  people  of  the  place  who  had  fled  dug  it  up  and 
ate  it. 

In  the  morning,  Taiaroa  and  Bloody  Jack  returned,  taking 
Wakapiri,  the  son  of  Puoho,  with  them  as  a slave  ; he  was 
treated,  however,  as  his  son,  and  afterwards  dismissed  with 
a handsome  present  of  two  green-stone  meres , and  a piece  of 
land,  as  an  atonement  for  his  fathers  death.  This  was  the 
end  of  the  war,  and  from  that  period  another  power  began 
to  be  felt,  which  soon  made  a remarkable  change  in  that  part 
of  the  country. 

A Missionary  had  been  located  at  Kapiti,  brought  by  Rau- 
paraha's  own  son,  and  he  sent  that  young  Chief  to  preach  the 
Gospel  to  Taiaroa,  peace  and  tranquillity  was  the  result;  this 
great  change  was  thus  effected,  some  of  the  young  Chiefs 
had  begun  to  be  disgusted  with  war,  amongst  these  were 
Tamihana  Katu  and  Matene  te  Whiwhi  o te  Rangi,  the 
former  being  the  son  of  Te  Rauparaha,  the  latter  his  nephew, 
they  were  the  two  most  influential  young  Chiefs  of  their 
respective  tribes,  and  determined  to  put  an  end  to  these  con- 
tinual wars,  having  heard  of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  in  the 
north,  and  that  through  it  fighting  there  had  ceased,  they 
resolved  to  go  to  the  Bay  of  Islands,  and  obtain  a Missionary 
for  their  end  of  the  island — a very  bold  and  hazardous 
undertaking ; for  the  Ngapuhi  were  their  sworn  enemies,  on 
account  of  their  Chief,  Te  Wairo,  whose  death  had  not  been 
forgotten,  the  recollection  of  it  caused  the  death  of  Pehi,  and 
many  of  their  Chiefs  at  Waharaupo;  still,  they  determined 
to  go,  and  much  honor  is  due  to  them,  for  even  their  own 
parents  were  opposed  to  their  going,  embarking  in  a whaling 
vessel,  they  safely  reached  the  Bay  of  Islands  ; this  was  in  the 
end  of  1838.  Their  arrival  was  most  opportune,  and  evidently 
timed  by  Providence,  for  when  their  request  was  refused  from 
the  inability  of  sparing  one  from  the  little  Missionary  band,  or 
the  unwillingness  of  any  to  proceed  to  so  savage  a part,  the 
two  young  Chiefs  declared,  they  would  not  return  without 
one,  and  their  constancy  was  rewarded ; for  whilst  they  thus 
persisted  in  staying,  a fresh  Missionary  arrived,  who  had 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


535 


been  detained  in  New  South  Wales  by  Mr.  Marsden  to 
occupy  a vacant  post  there.  Now,  said  they,  the  Lord  has 
sent  another  laborer  and  his  family,  one  must  be  spared  for 
us ; the  Rev.  0.  Hadfield,  who  then  assisted  in  conducting 
the  Missionary  school  at  the  Waimate,  volunteered  to  go. 
Satisfied  with  this  promise,  they  returned  home,  and  were 
speedily  followed  by  their  new  teacher,  accompanied  by  the 
Rev.  H.  Williams,  the  senior  minister,  in  the  Missionary 
schooner  Columbine ; as  there  were  two  great  tribes  living 
within  twelve  miles  of  each  other,  the  Missionary  wisely  had 
a house  erected  in  each  pa,  where  he  alternately  resided,  and 
with  much  patience  and  perseverance,  love  and  zeal,  persisted, 
firmly  supported  by  the  young  Chiefs,  who  lent  all  their 
influence  to  further  his  labors,  so  that  soon  the  hymn  was 
heard  instead  of  the  haka  ; and  the  hand  grasped  the  Gospel 
of  Peace,  instead  of  the  deadly  gun. 

In  1840,  The  Tory  arrived,  bearing  the  first  settlers  sent 
out  by  the  recently-formed  New  Zealand  Company;  men  of 
family  and  fortune  came  in  that  ship,  captivated  by  the  glow- 
iug  accounts  of  New  Zealand,  published  by  the  Company, 
which  said,  all  was  now  peace,  and  cannibalism  only  lived  in 
remembrance,  had  the  passengers  in  that  vessel,  however, 
known,  they  might  have  seen  a column  of  smoke  curling  up 
above  the  trees  of  Porirua,  where  they  were  then  cooking  a 
cannibal  repast ; some  time  previously  to  the  arrival  of  The 
Tory , a Captain  Cherry  was  murdered  by  a Porirua  chief ; 
when  the  people  saw  that  vessel,  they  mistook  it  for  a man- 
of-war,  and  fancied  it  came  to  demand  satisfaction  for  the 
murder ; they,  therefore,  determined  to  take  payment  them- 
selves beforehand,  to  show  the  English  they  had  nothing  to 
do  with  the  crime.  It  appears  that  poor  Captain  Cherry's 
feet  had  been  held  down  by  a slave,  whilst  his  master  killed 
him ; Maori  justice  fell  on  the  former — he  was  killed  and 
eaten,  whilst  his  guilty,  master  escaped. 

The  New  Zealand  Company  made  land  purchases  in  various 
parts  of  the  straits  at  Taranaki,  Wanganui,  Port  Nicholson, 
and  Nelson ; but,  unfortunately,  not  being  acquainted  with 
the  sub-divisions  of  property  or  the  language,  they  fancied 


536 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


they  were  purchasing  far  more  than  the  natives  either 
intended  to  sell  or  possessed  the  power  of  parting  with  ; the 
vague  and  unsatisfactory  way  in  which  those  purchases  were 
made,  were  productive  of  serious  evils,  constant  disputes 
arose,  the  claims  were  disallowed,  and  the  settlement  of  the 
land  delayed,  but  it  is  not  necessary  now  to  resuscitate  the 
remembrance  of  them. 

Hitherto  Te  Rauparaha  had  lived  on  terms  of  amity  with 
the  Europeans,  he  derived  his  importance  in  a great  measure 
from  his  intercourse  with  them,  and  therefore  it  was  his 
interest  still  to  maintain  it ; he  now  came  into  collision  with 
the  settlers ; the  views  taken  on  the  subject  vary,  the  fight  at 
Wairau  has  been  differently  described,  the  following  account 
is  chiefly  from  the  lips  of  a native  who  had  no  sentiments  in 
common  with  those  concerned ; and  as  he  received  it  from 
one  who  was  in  that  encounter,  it  may  be  regarded  as  an 
impartial  narrative;  and  also  explains  some  points  which 
were  before  inexplicable. 

It  commences  with  stating,  that  an  angry  feeling  was 
excited  in  the  breast  of  Rangihaeata,  on  account  of  the  result 
of  a trial.  A native  woman  was  supposed  to  have  been 
murdered  by  some  European,  and  there  appears  much  reason 
to  think  the  supposition  was  correct;  still,  there  was  not 
sufficient  evidence  to  convict  him,  he  therefore  escaped ; this 
woman  was  a connexion  of  Rangihaeata,  and  he  viewed  the 
acquittal  of  the  accused  as  a sign  of  the  judge's  partiality 
towards  his  countryman,  and  could  not  forget  it ; shortly 
afterwards  it  was  told  him  that  the  Europeans  were  survey- 
ing the  Wairau  Valley,  he  exclaimed  with  indignation,  this  is 
the  second  time  they  have  wounded  me,  they  murdered  my 
relative,  and  now  they  are  taking  my  land,  they  are  seeking 
a quarrel  with  me ; the  Company  professed  to  have  bought 
the  Wairau,  but  the  natives  disallowed  the  purchase;  he 
therefore  went  and  told  Te  Rauparaha  his  uncle,  and  said, 
let  us  go  and  send  the  surveyors  back  to  Nelson,  to  the 
place  which  they  have  really  bought,  but  Wairau  I shall  not 
part  with ; they  therefore  crossed  over  the  Straits,  and  com- 
manded the  surveyors  to  leave,  as  the  land  was  not  sold  ; the 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANG1HAEATA. 


537 


Europeans  said  it  was ; wlio  then,  answered  Rangihaeata, 
could  sell  my  land  ? They  said  it  had  been  sold  by  other 
natives,  he  denied  having  had  anything  to  do  with  the  sale ; 
they  replied,  it  did  not  signify  whether  he  had  or  not,  the 
land  was  theirs ; this  greatly  exasperated  the  chief,  he 
ordered  his  men  to  take  all  the  things  belonging  to  the 
surveyors  out  of  the  temporary  building  they  had  erected, 
and  to  be  careful  and  leave  nothing  belonging  to  them  in  the 
house,  and  then  set  it  on  fire,  the  Europeans  threatened 
Rangihaeata,  and  told  him  he  would  be  hung. 

The  Chief  afterwards  visited  one  of  his  cultivations  on  the 
Wairau,  whilst  the  surveyors  returned  to  Nelson,  and  made 
the  Company's  agents  acquainted  with  all  that  had  taken 
place;  a warrant  was  at  once  issued  by  the  police  magis- 
trate for  the  apprehension  of  Rangihaeata  and  Te  Rauparaha ; 
the  magistrate  himself,  Captain  Wakefield,  the  Company’s 
agent.  Captain  England,  and  several  other  chief  settlers, 
with  some  constables,  about  thirty  altogether,  went  to 
execute  it ; when  they  reached  the  Wairau,  they  found  the 
natives  encamped  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river;  they 
called  for  a canoe  to  cross  in,  and  one  was  immediately 
furnished  them ; on  reaching  the  spot  where  the  natives 
were  sitting,  the  magistrate  demanded  of  the  chiefs  their 
reason  for  burning  the  surveyors'  hut  ? They  replied,  they 
had  no  business  on  land  which  did  not  belong  to  them,  and 
which  had  not  been  sold,  the  magistrate  was  extremely 
angry,  and  said,  you  have  done  very  wrong  to  burn  the 
house ; Rangihaeata  replied,  there  was  nothing  English  in 
it,  the  toetoe , or  flags  of  which  it  was  built,  and  the  poles 
were  all  taken  from  my  own  land ; there  was  not  a single 
stick  of  it  English,  everything  belonging  to  the  surveyors 
he  had  caused  to  be  carefully  removed  outside  the  house, 
because  he  well  knew  how  fond  the  Europeans  were  of 
law ; and  so  truly  you  have  come  to  try  me  forjny  toetoe, 
if  indeed,  you  had  bought  the  land,  that  would  have  been 
quite  right,  but  this  is  a foolish  affair  altogether,  this 
greatly  incensed  the  magistrate,  who  told  Rangihaeata,  the 
.Europeans  would  soon  hang  him  ; the  chiefs  did  not  under- 


538 


TE  EAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


stand  the  threat,  until  a woman  who  could  speak  English 
explained  it  to  them;  Rangihaeata  replied,  Very  well,  hang 
me  on  my  own  land,  my  relative  was  killed  by  you  English, 
and  therefore  you  may  as  well  kill  me  also  upon  my  land ; you 
told  me  no  European  could  go  on  land  not  belonging  to  him, 
yet  I now  see  the  European  is  false — he  takes  land  to  which 
he  has  no  claim,  I am  to  be  hung,  but  you  are  not ; the 
magistrate,  more  incensed,  cried  to  his  followers — fire,  a gun 
went  off,  and  shot  a woman  of  Rangihaeata ; then  Rawiri 
Puaha  exclaimed,  now  the  law  for  us  is  clear,  Tamai  Hengia 
ran  to  the  place  where  their  guns  were  laid,  and  Rangihaeta 
went  away  from  fear;  but  Te  Rauparaha  turned  and  said, 
“ Ka,  awe  te  mamae (a  chief*  s exclamation  before  battle — 
alas  ! the  pain) . Te  Oro  ran  with  his  hatchet,  and  threw  it 
at  one  of  the  Europeans,  who  fell  into  the  river ; the  Euro- 
peans tumbled  one  over  the  other  into  the  canoe  in  trying  to 
cross ; those  who  succeeded  in  getting  over  first,  escaped ; 
the  last  fell  into  the  natives*  hands.  Captain  Wakefield  and 
all  the  gentlemen  were  taken;  they  were  not  killed,  but 
when  Rangihaeata  returned,  he  bid  them  kill  all,  as  a pay- 
ment for  their  relative  the  woman ; for  he  said  that  he  had 
been  told  in  all  the  European  battles  they  never  injured 
women ; therefore,  let  them  die  as  a payment — all  were 
killed ; they  then  embarked  in  their  canoe,  and  crossed  over 
to  Otaki. 

This  melancholy  event  caused  deep  gloom  to  rest  on  the 
little  settlement  of  Nelson,  and  for  a time  retarded  its  pro- 
gress. On  the  arrival  of  Governor  Fitzroy  at  Waikanae,  he 
summoned  Te  Rauparaha  and  Rangihaeata  to  meet  him ; he 
heard  their  statement,  and  having  previously  been  acquainted 
with  that  of  the  settlers,  he  reproved  them  for  their  cruelty 
in  putting  their  prisoners  to  death,  after  they  had  surrendered ; 
but  told  them  that  as  the  proceeding  of  the  settlers,  and 
especially  of  the  police  magistrate,  was  altogether  unjustifiable 
and  illegal,  he  should  not  demand  satisfaction  for  it,  but  he 
solemnly  warned  them  to  beware  for  the  future ; it  was  a 
pity  the  Governor  was  not  acquainted  with  native  customs ; 
otherwise  he  would  have  claimed  the  district  as  having  been 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


539 


paid  for  with  blood ; this  was  what  the  Chiefs  themselves 
expected ; it  would  have  asserted  our  power,  and  made  a 
salutary  impression  on  the  native  mind,  for  it  is  a fixed 
custom  amongst  themselves,  and  in  after  years,  when  the 
Middle  Island  was  sold  by  Taiaroa  and  the  descendants  of 
Tamaiharanui,  Rangihaeata  himself  demanded  part  of  the 
payment  for  the  blood  of  his  relatives  Pehi  and  his  com- 
panions, who  were  murdered  at  Waharaupo,  and  their  claims 
were  allowed  by  Governor  Grey,  and  not  doing  so,  made 
that  Chief  entertain  a very  low  opinion  of  British  power;  he 
is  reported  to  have  said,  “ He  jpaukena  te  pakeha,” — The 
Governor  is  soft,  he  is  a pumpkin. 

After  the  Wairau  affair,  Rangihaeata  went  up  the  Rangi- 
tikei ; two  Wanganui  Chiefs  pursued  after  him,  and  had 
they  not  been  dissuaded  by  others,  would  certainly  have 
taken  him  prisoner,  and  given  him  up  to  the  Governor,  for 
they  had  no  love  for  him.  When  the  disturbances  three 
years  later  broke  out  in  the  Hutt,  he  went  and  put  himself 
at  the  head  of  the  hostile  natives.*  Rauparaha  remained 
neutral,  but  having  so  many  of  his  relatives  engaged  in  the 
war,  who  in  the  native  style  continued  to  hold  intercourse 
with  him,  he  was  suspected,  and  the  Governor  ordered  the 
Captain  of  the  Calliope  to  seize  him,  which  was  no  difficult 
matter,  as  he  continued  to  reside  in  his  house  close  to  the 
sea-shore.  A boat's  crew  quietly  landed  one  evening,  and 
carried  him  back  with  them  to  the  ship. 

Although  an  old  man,  Rangihaeata  accompanied  the 

* When  Rauparaha  heard  that  Rangihaeata  intended  to  fight  with  the  Euro- 
peans, the  following  angry  conversation  took  place  between  the  two  Chiefs  : — 

E mea  ana  te  Rauparaha  ki  a Ran-  Rauparaha  said,  go  to  the  mountain, 

gihaeata  Haere  koe  ki  te  maunga  kia  that  you  may  be  smoked  to  death  by 
waka  pongia  ki  te  ahi  rarauhi.  wet  fern,  alluding  to  his  having  to  en- 

camp out  in  the  depth  of  winter,  and 
use  wet  fuel. 

Te  mea  ana  a Rangihaeata  haere  The  answer  given  was,  go  you  to  the 
koe  ki  te  moana  kia  waka  puarutia  ki  sea,  as  a relish  for  potatoes,  alluding  to 
te  tokanga  kai  maoa.  * the  custom  of  placing  some  fish  or  flesh 

on  the  basket  of  cooked  potatoes,  as  a 
relish,  and  to  his  being  taken  prisoner. 

* These  are  taken  from  one  of  their  fables. 


540 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGJHAEATA. 


natives  in  all  their  skirmishes,  lived  with  them  in  the  depth 
of  the  forest,  and  in  their  fastnesses ; before  he  left  Porirua, 
(travelling  at  that  time  being  stopped  by  the  natives,)  I saw 
him,  having  been  brought  before  that  savage  Chief ; he 
expressed  himself  very  bitterly  about  the  conduct  of  Govern- 
ment, and  especially  alluded  to  the  burning  of  a church  and 
burial  ground  belonging  to  the  Hutt  natives  ; it  was  indeed 
an  unjustifiable  and  wanton  act  committed  by  a constable, 
who  had  no  proper  officer  to  superintend  him  ; he  called  the 
Europeans  a murderous  race ; he  was  reminded  of  his  own 
acts,  and  told  the  Europeans  were  afraid  to  commit  murder, 
from  the  fear  of  God,  he  said  it  was  false ; and  as  for  God, 
he  was  a god  himself,  and  thrust  out  his  tongue  to  an 
unnatural  length,  which  quivered  like  a serpent's,  and  rolled 
his  bloody  eye-balls  like  a demon. 

A large  British  and  native  force  was  raised,  he  was 
attacked  in  his  pa  at  Paua-taha-nui,  and  driven  from  it; 
thence  he  took  up  a post  on  a mound  in  the  middle  of  the 
forest  of  the  Horokiri  Yalley,  called  Bemutaka.  With  some 
loss  he  was  driven  thence,  and  conducting  his  men  along  the 
heights  of  the  mountain  in  depth  of  winter,  supporting  them- 
selves chiefly  on  joitau  (cooked  fern  tree),  he  safely  reached 
Poroutawao,  although  pursued  by  a very  large  force.  The 
spot  he  selected  was  so  shut  in  by  swamps,  that  it  was 
thought  most  prudent  to  leave  him  there. 

Bauparaha  remained  a prisoner  for  nearly  two  years.  The 
writer  saw  him  on  board  the  Calliope , a few  days  after  his 
being  taken;  he  was  well  fed  and  kindly  treated,  and  had  a 
large  cabin  given  up  to  him  ; he  appeared  in  good  spirits,  and 
did  not  seem  to  repine  at  his  lot,  in  fact,  he  became  strongly 
attached  to  Captain  Stanley,  an  open  jovial  British  sailor, 
and  afterwards,  when  released  at  Auckland,  he  left  all  his 
valuables  in  the  Captain's  charge,  and  whenever  the  Calliope 
came  near  his  residence,  he  showed  his  attachment  to  him 
in  every  way  which  laid  in  his  power.  The  old  Chief  on  re- 
turning to  his  tribe,  did  not  feel  that  he  had  been  degraded ; 
neither  was  there  any  diminution  of  his  regard  for  Europeans. 
The  Governor  wisely  gave  him  several  handsome  presents 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RAN GIHAEATA . 


541 


at  his  departure,  and  from  that  time  to  his  death,  he  quietly 
resided  amongst  his  people,  and  invariably  might  be  seen  at 
the  daily  service,  morning  and  evening,  dressed  in  a captain’s 
naval  uniform.  He  seemed  to  view  the  rapid  advance  of  his 
tribe  in  the  arts  of  civilization  with  the  greatest  satisfaction, 
as  well  as  the  progress  of  the  children  in  the  schools. 

In  November,  1849,  the  old  Chief  expired  at  Otaki,  he 
was  not  baptized,  and  although  his  son  wished  the  burial 
service  of  the  Church  to  be  used  at  his  funeral,  the  minister 
did  not  feel  himself  justified  in  doing  so ; however,  a lay 
member  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society  from  Wanganui 
opportunely  passing  through  the  place,  read  the  service  over 
him ; and  thus  terminated  the  eventful  life  of  this  New 
Zealand  warrior. 

In  stature,  he  was  not  above  five  feet  six  inches ; but  his 
countenance  was  striking;*  he  had  a Homan,  or  hooked , 
nose,  an  eagle  glance,  which  read  the  thoughts  of  others 
without  revealing  his  own,  and  a look  which  clearly  marked 
his  dauntless  bearing,  it  seemed  impossible  to  take  him  by 
surprise,  his  being  long  accustomed  to  command,  gave  him 
a dignified  demeanour,  and  his  fertility  in  expedients,  a 
cunning,  or  rather  shrewd  cast  of  countenance  ; even  when 
clad  in  a blanket,  few  could  look  at  him  without  being  im- 
pressed with  a feeling  that  he  was  no  ordinary  person. 

The  character  of  this  Chief  has  been  variously  drawn. 
The  settlers  in  general  viewed  him  as  everything  bad,  most 
treacherous,  and  deceitful,  but  this  opinion  was  not  founded 
on  their  personal  acquaintance  with  him,  so  much  as  from 
report ; the  whalers  and  traders,  who  had  the  best  oppor- 
tunity of  being  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  and  that, 
too,  at  a time  when  his  power  to  injure  was  the  greatest,  in- 
variably spoke  of  him  as  having  ever  been  the  white  man’s 
friend ; he  always  placed  the  best  he  had  before  them,  and 
in  no  instance  have  I heard  of  his  doing  any  one  of  them  an 
injury ; speaking  of  him  to  an  old  whaler,  he  said  most  em- 
phatically, that  he  never  let  the  white  man  who  needed , want 

* It  is  remarkable,  that  most  great  conquerors  were  small  men  ; — Alexan- 
der, Caesar,  Napoleon,  Wellington,  &c.  ; and  the  eye  and  nose  alike  in  all. 


542 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


any  thing  he  could  give,  whether  food  or  clothing,  in  fact,  his 
natural  sagacity  told  him  that  it  was  his  interest  to  make 
common  cause  with  the  Europeans,  for  it  was  through  them 
he  acquired  the  sinews  of  war,  guns,  powder,  shot,  and  every- 
thing else  that  he  required. 

In  latter  days,  when  the  influx  of  Europeans  became  greater 
and  they  held  permanent  possession  of  his  land,  without 
making  common  cause  with  him,  as  the  whalers  had  done, 
but  often  treating  him  in  a slighting  way,  it  is  natural  to 
suppose  that  he  would  regard  them  with  more  suspicion 
than  attachment;  and  so  should  we  also,  had  we  been  in 
his  place.  That  he  was  a savage  conqueror  and  cannibal, 
guilty  of  many  enormities  and  unmerciful  deeds,  cannot  be 
denied,  but  it  must  also  be  remembered,  that  he  did  not 
possess  the  light  which  we  do  ; and  when  his  deeds  are  put 
alongside  with  those  committed  in  civilized  and  Christian 
warfare,  for  which  have  we  the  most  reason  to  blush  ? 

Sir  George  Grey,  by  his  kindness  and  presents,  drew 
Rangihaeata  several  times  from  his  retreat  at  Poroutawao, 
as  a tiger  from  his  lair,  and  when  he  thought  he  had  conci- 
liated his  regard,  and  secured  his  friendship,  he  asked  him 
to  sell  Waikanae,  it  would  have  been  a subject  for  an  artist 
to  picture  the  indignant  looks  of  the  Chief ; he  flatly  and 
rudely  refused,  telling  him  to  be  content  with  what  he  had 
got.  “You  have  had  Porirua,  Ahuriri,  Wairarapa,  Wan- 
ganui, Rangitikei,  and  the  whole  of  the  Middle  Island  given 
up  to  you,  and  still  are  not  content ; we  are  driven  up  into 
a corner,  and  yet  you  covet  that  also.”  Chagrined  and 
disappointed  the  Governor  took  his  leave  ; he,  however,  was 
most  highly  honored  at  his  departure  by  many  tokens  of 
regard,  and  interesting  addresses  were  sent  him  from  those 
very  natives,  though  they  refused  to  accede  to  his  wish  and 
part  with  their  patrimony. 

The  earliest  visit  paid  Rangihaeata  after  the  war,  was  by 
Lieut. -Governor  Eyre  and  myself ; he  was  still  at  Porou- 
tawao ; a long  low  narrow  strip  of  land,  running  through 
deep  swamps,  led  to  his  retreat ; the  name  of  the  place  aptly 
describes  it,  being  a cork,  or  stoppage  to  war,  and  few  would 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


543 


have  liked  to  draw  it  out.*  The  pa  was  on  a mound,  the 
only  one  in  the  vicinity,  and  strongly  fortified  in  the  native 
style,  with  thick  lofty  posts  deeply  sunk  in  the  ground,  and 
bound  together  with  a huohua , or  connecting  pole,  running 
round,  at  the  height  of  about  ten  feet  from  the  ground. 
Inside  the  outer  fence  there  was  another,  behind  which  the 
defenders  could  post  themselves,  and  take  aim  through  the 
outer  one.  The  pa  was  divided  into  a number  of  small 
courts,  each  equally  well  defended,  and  connected  by  very 
narrow  passages.  We  found  the  Chief  with  his  wives  and 
head  men  assembled  in  the  chief  court,  or  marae,  sitting  on 
mats  in  front  of  his  house ; fresh  fern  was  strewed  on  the 
ground,  and  new  mats  laid  on  it  for  us,  we  were  received 
with  great  respect,  and  welcomed  with  a loud  haeremai , we 
sat  down  on  the  Chief's  right  hand,  and  conversed  on 
various  subjects,  until  we  were  invited  to  enter  a neighbour- 
ing house,  where  no  one  followed  us,  except  a neatly-dressed 
and  good-looking  lady,  who  was  appointed  to  wait  upon  us, 
according  to  Maori  etiquette;  there  was  a kind  of  table 
formed  of  two  boxes,  one  placed  on  the  other,  with  a new 
red  blanket  thrown  over  it,  and  a form  similarly  covered  in 
regal  style  ; on  the  table  was  placed  a dish  of  good  fresh- 
baked  cakes,  another  containing  sugar,  a knife,  spoon,  and 
two  basins,  one  nearly  allied  to  a wash-hand  basin  in  size. 
The  lady  then  brought  a tea-kettle,  and  filled  our  cups  with 
an  infusion  of  mint,  which  she  called  tea;  the  wash-hand 
basin  was,  of  course,  placed  before  the  representative  of 
Majesty,  who  viewed  with  dismay  its  enormous  capacity, 
which  being  given  him  from  respect,  he  could  not  well  avoid 
draining  to  the  bottom  ; after  enjoying  the  Governor's  per- 
plexity, when  the  lady  left  the  room,  I emptied  the  contents 
of  our  bowls  into  a calabash,  from  which  our  natives  were 
drinking  ; our  repast  being  ended,  we  returned  to  the  Chief, 
and  sat  by  his  side.  The  Governor  requested  me  to  ask  the 
Chief  to  sell  land,  which  I respectfully  declined  doing,  he 

* Poroutawao  means  the  remains  of  a bird  caught  in  a snare,  and  partly- 
consumed  by  dogs,  in  the  wilderness  ; but  the  common  pronunciation  Puru 
tawa  bears  the  signification  given. 


544 


TE  RAUPARAHA  AND  RANGIHAEATA. 


then  attempted  to  do  so  himself ; at  first  he  was  not  under- 
stood, but  when  the  Chief  comprehended  what  he  meant,  he 
gave  a savage  look  of  defiance,  thrusting  out  his  tongue, 
and  rolling  about  his  eyes  in  such  a way,  that  his  Excellency, 
who  had  never  seen  such  a display  before,  stared  with  amaze- 
ment, and  evidently  felt  anything  but  at  ease.  It  need  not 
be  said  the  land  negotiations  were  speedily  terminated,  and 
we  were  soon  threading  our  way  back  along  Rangihaeata' s 
swamp-girt  road. 

He  was  then  an  old  man,  with  a head  as  white  as  the  top 
of  Tongariro,  and  a spirit  somewhat  resembling  that  active 
volcano,  always  fuming,  his  white  hair  strangely  contrasted 
with  his  bronzed  features  and  highly  tattooed  countenance. 

He  remained  unchanged  in  his  views  during  the  con- 
cluding period  of  his  life.  His  countenance  had  not  the 
marked  character  of  Te  Rauparaha's,  neither  does  he  appear 
to  have  equalled  his  relative  either  in  wisdom,  courage,  or 
nobleness  of  deportment ; still,  he  was  a wonderful  man, 
guilty  of  much  bloodshed,  and  died  a heathen. 

The  word  Rangihaeata  means  the  morning  sun-beam. 

The  following  song  was  sung  to  show  the  deceitfulness  of 
Te  Rauparaha : — 


Taware  mai,  te  tangata  taware 
mai, 

Pokipoki  mai,  te  wahine  poki- 
poki  mai, 

E mahi,  te  mahi,  koua  mahia, 
E moe,  te  moe,  koua  horahia, 

Ina  matara  huri  akenei. 


Deceive,  deceive  the  man, 

Flatter,  flatter  the  woman, 

Work  the  work,  don’t  let  it  end, 
Sleep  the  sleep,  don’t  let  it  be 

seen 

When  the  eye  turns  round. 


He  Puha,  or  Jeering  Song  on  Te  Rauparaha. 

Haere  atu  ki  te  pai,  Go  and  find  out  the 

A te  Paraha,  Good  of  Rauparaha. 

He  pai  ranei ; he  kahore  ranei,  Is  he  good,  or  is  he  bad  ? 

He  waka  te  watewaia,  kuaka  Is  he  a deceiver,  or  is  he  not  ? 

Kia  ware,  e-kia  ware.  Don’t  forget,  don’t  forget. 


JOHN  WILLIAMS  HIPANGO,  WHO  FELL  AT  OHOTAHI,  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THE  WANGANUI 
SETTLEMENT. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

HONE  HEKE. 

This  Chief  belonged  to  the  Nga  puhi  tribe,,  he  married  the 
daughter  of  Hongi,  and  was  one  of  the  early  converts  to 
Christianity,  distinguishing  himself  by  his  knowledge  of 
Scripture,  and  consistency  of  conduct,  until  the  assump- 
tion of  British  authority  in  1840.  Listening  to  the  insidious 
representations  of  unprincipled  foreigners,  then  roving  about 
the  country,  he  conceived  the  idea  that  the  British  Govern- 
ment intended  to  make  slaves  of  the  Maori.  His  first  great 
display  of  anger  was  occasioned  by  a flagstaff,  which  was 
erected  on  the  heights  above  Kororareka,  to  signal  ships, 
this  he  was  told  was  the  sign  of  their  being  reduced  to 
slavery,  he  therefore  went  and  cut  it  down  (July  1844). 

N N 


546 


HONE  HEKE. 


Captain  Fitzroy,  the  Governor,  sent  for  some  military  from 
Sydney,  about  one  hundred  and  eighty  of  the  99th  Regiment 
arrived,  he  then  held  a meeting  with  Heke,  Walker  Nene, 
Moses  Tawai,  and  others  ; the  two  latter  offered  to  be  surety 
for  Heke's  good  behaviour ; they  said,  if  the  soldiers  were 
sent  away  he  would  be  peaceable,  and  if  not,  they  would  then 
make  common  cause  with  the  Government ; the  Governor 
agreed,  and  sent  the' soldiers  back,  who  returned  grumbling 
and  disappointed  to  Sydney;  at  his  request,  ten  muskets 
were  given  up,  and  laid  at  his  feet,  satisfied  with  this  proof 
of  submission,  he  returned  them  to  their  owners,  this  act  was 
found  great  fault  with,  but  it  was  a prudent  one,  for  had  he 
taken  his  little  troop  inland,  it  could  have  done  nothing;  but, 
unsupported  by  native  allies,  would  doubtless  have  been  cut 
off  by  Heke’s  ambuscades,  as  it  was,  the  Governor  secured 
valuable  allies,  who  afterwards  contributed  to  the  final  success 
of  our  arms. 

This  peaceable  state  was  however  of  short  duration,  Heke 
again  listened  to  the  tales  of  men  ill-affected  to  the  British 
Government,  and  a second  time  went  and  cut  down  the  flag- 
staff ; another  was  erected,  sheathed  with  iron,  six  feet  high, 
and  protected  by  a block  house  with  twenty  men.  Walker 
remonstrated  with  Heke,  but  he  insulted  him,  and  proceeded 
in  his  hostile  course,  many  acts  of  plunder  were  committed 
on  the  settlers;  in  February,  1845,  it  became  evident  that 
another  attack  would  be  made  on  the  flagstaff,  the  block 
house  was,  therefore,  further  strengthened,  and  Captain 
Robertson,  of  the  Hazard , sent  to  protect  the  town  of  Koro- 
rareka,  which  was  menaced  by  a force  of  near  eight  hundred, 
under  the  command  of  Heke  and  Kawiti,  who  had  joined 
him  with  all  his  men. 

Walker  and  several  other  Chiefs  met  Heke  a day  or  two 
before  at  the  Waimate,  and  told  him,  if  he  persisted  in  his 
hostile  course,  they  should  join  the  Governor.  Heke  said, 
he  had  heard  that  the  snake,  whose  head  he  had  cut  off,  had 
grown  into  a monster,  with  many  mouths,  and  that  he  was 
anxious  to  see  the  strange  sight — alluding  to  the  flagstaff 
and  loop  holes  in  the  block  house. 


HONE  HEKE. 


547 


This  large  force  encamped  about  a mile  from  the  town,  out 
of  the  range  of  the  Hazard’s  guns.  Several  skirmishes  took 
place.  Lieutenant  Philpotts  was  taken  prisoner;  they  took 
away  his  pistols,  but,  having  danced  the  war  dance  around 
him,  one  was  returned,  and  they  good  humouredly  let  him 
go,  bidding  him  take  more  care  of  himself  for  the  future. 
On  the  Sunday,  one  of  the  Missionaries  went  and  preached 
to  them  from  James,  whence  came  wars  and  fightings ; when 
he  had  finished,  Heke  bid  him  go  and  preach  the  same  sermon 
to  the  sailors  and  soldiers,  who  equally  needed  his  warnings. 

On  the  evening  of  the  10th  of  March,  Heke  went  with  a 
party  of  two  hundred  men,  and  placed  himself  in  ambuscade 
near  the  block  house,  whilst  Kawiti,  at  the  head  of  a similar 
number,  advanced  upon  the  town,  not  to  injure  the  settlers, 
as  he  afterwards  said,  but  to  draw  off  the  attention  of  the 
sailors  from  Heke’s  attack  on  the  block  house.  About  four 
o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  11th,  the  inhabitants  of  Koro- 
rareka  were  aroused  by  the  sound  of  musketry,  Kawiti  was 
making  his  descent  upon  the  town,  when  his  course  was 
arrested  by  Captain  Robertson,  at  the  head  of  about  twenty- 
five  men,  who  defended  a narrow  defile  against  an  over- 
whelming force.  A sharp  encounter  took  place,  in  which 
six  or  seven  of  the  sailors  were  killed,  and  as  many  more 
wounded,  amongst  whom  was  the  Captain,  who  had  suffered 
so  severely  that  his  life  was  at  first  despaired  of,  but  he 
eventually  recovered,  having  manifested  great  bravery,  and 
killed  several  with  his  own  hand,  which  excited  the  admira- 
tion of  his  enemies.  Kawiti  lost  near  twenty  men,  and 
amongst  them  several  high  Chiefs,  and  had  many  wounded. 

Heke  succeeded  in  taking  the  block  house,  and  cutting 
down  his  enemy,  the  flagstaff ; he  then  danced  the  war  dance 
with  his  men  on  the  hill,  in  token  of  victory ; the  natives 
finally  gained  the  day,  and  the  explosion  of  the  gunpowder 
magazine  induced  the  British  to  evacuate  the  town,  which 
was  safely  effected  under  the  guns  of  the  Hazard . The 
natives  themselves  appeared  surprised  at  their  victory  and 
the  abandonment  of  the  town,  which  they  for  a long  time 
forbore  entering ; afterwards  they  did  so,  and  plundered  the 

N N 2 


548 


HONE  HEKE. 


place,  which  they  never  would  have  done,  had  it  not  been 
thus  deserted  by  its  inhabitants ; but,  at  the  same  time,  they 
manifested  a degree  of  forbearance  and  humanity  which, 
under  similar  circumstances,  is  seldom  found  displayed  by 
more  civilized  combatants  ; they  allowed  the  inhabitants  to 
re-enter  their  houses,  and  carry  off  their  valuables,  Heke 
even  sent  a female  and  her  child  under  a flag  of  truce  to  the 
vessels,  which  had  received  the  houseless  inhabitants ; the 
Bishop  and  one  of  the  Missionaries  landed,  and  buried  the 
dead,  the  Roman  Catholic  Bishop  was  equally  active;  the 
Maori  then  burned  the  town,  but  carefully  spared  the  Mission 
House  and  Church,  with  that  of  the  Roman  Catholics.  The 
Governor’s  testimony  was,  that  acts  of  a chivalrous  nature 
were  performed  by  them,  and  their  forbearance  towards  the 
settlers,  and  especially  the  Missionaries,  after  the  conflict, 
was  remarkable. 

The  result  of  this  war  was  increasing  the  military  force, 
and  beginning  a regular  campaign ; it  caused  Walker  and 
others  to  declare  in  favor  of  the  Governor  ; that  Chief 
promptly  mustered  two  hundred  and  fifty  men,  and  came 
to  the  Waimate,  as  early  as  March  19th,  when  Heke 
refused  to  join  them,  Walker  Nene  said, — That  man  has 
despised  us,  who  are  much  older  than  himself,  and  ridi- 
culed our  threats  ; who  is  he,  or  what  is  he,  that  he  should 
thus  trample  underfoot  the  advice  of  his  fathers  ? — he  has 
always  been  troublesome,  but  latterly  has  become  unbear- 
able ; if  we  do  not  oppose  him,  he  will  soon  tyrannize  over 
those  who  have  fed  and  nourished  him,  and  we  shall  no  longer 
have  peace ; — he  wrote  to  the  Governor  and  told  him  he  had 
come  to  fulfil  his  promise,  and  aid  in  putting  down  Heke. 

In  April,  H.M.S.  North  Star , and  two  transport  ships, 
arrived  in  the  Bay,  with  three  hundred  men.  Pomare  was 
taken  on  board,  and  kept  a prisoner ; afterwards  the  troops 
were  marched  into  the  interior  to  join  Walker;  on  reaching 
Mawe,  where  Heke  had  built  a strong  pa,  an  engagement 
took  place ; Kawiti  was  nearly  taken,  he  feigned  death,  threw 
himself  down,  and  the  enemy  passed  and  repassed  him,  but  he 
escaped,  the  troops,  after  a gallant  resistance,  gave  way. 


HONE  HEKE. 


549 


On  the  3rd  May,  four  hundred  and  twenty  men  were 
landed  at  the  Bay,  they  went  inland  to  attack  Heke,  who 
had  retired  with  the  other  Chiefs  to  a pa  at  one  of  the  ex- 
tremities of  the  Bay.  The  North  Star  also  proceeded  there ; 
a fruitless  attack  was  made  on  the  8th  of  May ; the  troops 
had  only  brought  three  days’  provisions  with  them,  and  had 
it  not  been  for  Walkers  furnishing  a liberal  supply,  they 
would  have  been  famished ; Kuhe,  a neutral  Chief,  provided 
a number  of  pigs  and  potatoes  for  Heke  and  the  soldiers ; the 
road  to  the  latter  laying  through  the  native  camp,  he  asked 
permission  to  drive  his  pigs  for  the  soldiers,  this,  as  a matter 
of  course,  was  immediately  granted.  The  pa  was  abandoned 
and  the  troops  also  retreated  to  the  coast,  with  the  loss  of 
fifteen  killed,  and  thirty-seven  wounded.  Heke  sent  a message 
to  the  British  Officers,  to  say  that  their  dead  should  have 
Christian  burial,  and  he  accordingly  sent  for  a Missionary, 
who  performed  that  melancholy  duty.  The  troops  were  re- 
embarked, and  returned  to  Auckland. 

In  June,  a large  body  of  six  or  seven  hundred  men,  under 
Colonel  Despard,  attacked  Heke  at  Taiamai,  where  he  and 
Kawiti  had  built  a strong  pa.  On  hearing  of  this  great  force, 
Heke  tried  to  conquer  Walker  before  he  could  join  it ; in 
this,  however,  he  failed,  and  received  a severe  wound  in  the 
thigh.  Colonel  Despard  stated  in  his  dispatch,  that  one-third 
of  the  men  actually  engaged  fell  in  the  attack.*  Before  the 
fight,  Walker’s  men  joined  in  singing  a hymn,  and  in  prayer 
for  the  success  of  the  troops.  The  native  Christians  in 
the  pa  did  the  same,  and  though  our  men  in  this  respect 
were  wanting,  still  it  was  afterwards  found  there  were 
amongst  our  poor  fellows  who  fell,  those  who  committed 
their  souls  to  God  before  they  rushed  into  the  fight,  and 
many  others  who  were  greatly  encouraged  by  hearing  the 
solemn  prayers  of  the  natives  in  their  behalf ; the  bugle 
which  sounded  the  attack,  was  only  eight  minutes  before  it 
again  sounded  the  retreat,  and  in  that  brief  space  of  time, 
one  hundred  and  twenty  of  our  men  entered  eternity ! amongst 

* Colonel  Despard  is  reported  to  have  said,  before  he  left  Sydney,  that  he 
would  either  take  Heke  alive  or  dead,  or  fall  in  the  attempt — he  did  neither. 


550 


HONE  HEKE. 


whom  were  Lieutenant  Phillpotts  and  Captain  Grant ; these 
the  Missionary  buried  in  the  church-yard  at  the  Waimate ; 
the  body  of  the  latter  was  only  recovered  after  the  place  fell, 
having  been  buried  by  the  natives.*  Afterwards,  when  the 
artillery  was  brought  to  bear  on  the  pa,  it  was  taken ; when 
the  news  reached  Auckland,  the  inhabitants  for  a time  were 
panic  struck,  and  almost  expected  to  see  the  enemy  at  their 
doors. 

Heke  then  built  another  strong  pa,  called  Ruapekapeka, 
which  was  considered  a masterpiece  of  Maori  fortification, f 
after  much  skirmishing,  in  January  1846,  it  was  taken  pos- 
session of ; on  the  Sabbath  the  defenders  retired  outside, 
to  the  part  the  furthest  removed  from  the  besiegers,  while 
they  held  their  service,  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  the  balls  : this 
being  discovered,  the  troops  entered  the  place  before  Heke5s 
men  could  return,  and  the  pa  fell.  He  retired  to  the  interior, 
where  he  continued  to  reside  in  his  native  fastnesses,  secure 
from  pursuit ; after  having  made  an  honorable  peace,  he  lived 
in  quiet  until  his  death,  which  took  place  in  1850. 

However  mistaken  Heke^s  views  may  have  been,  yet  he 
can  only  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  a patriot ; his  modera- 
tion in  prosperity,  and  total  absence  of  vindictiveness  and 
cruelty  in  war  towards  those  thrown  into  his  power,  will 
always  tell  in  his  favor ; it  is  to  be  regretted  that  he  was 
made  the  dupe  of  designing  men  and  worthless  characters ; 
but  making  allowances  for  his  only  partially- enlightened 
mind,  his  faults  will  not  be  sufficient  to  eclipse  the  glory 
which  he  gained,  in  so  successfully  combating  those  who 
possessed  all  the  skill  and  resources  which  military  science 
could  bestow.  The  Governor  wisely  made  peace  with  the 
insurgents. 

Some  time  afterwards.  Sir  Everard  Home,  Commander 
of  the  North  Star , paid  Kawiti  a visit.  He  said,  "Well, 
Kawiti,  is  it  peace  now?”  The  old  Chief  replied,  "Well,  it 

* A report  was  circulated  that  Captain  Grant’s  body  had  been  partly  eaten, 
but  it  was  totally  untrue. 

f A model  of  it  was  made  by  Colonel  Wynyard,  and  sent  to  the  Great 
Exhibition.  Ruapekapeka  in  English  is  Bat’s  Nest. 


TAPOUKA. 


551 


is  for  yon  gentlemen  of  the  big  guns,  to  say  if  yon  have  had 
enough ; we  have,,  then  let  there  be  peace.” 

Thus  ended  the  first,  and  it  is  hoped  the  last,  war  in 
the  north  of  the  Island,  between  the  European  and  native 
races.  However  much  it  may  be  lamented,  we  cannot  but 
regard  it  as  one  of  those  events  which,  in  the  course  of 
Providence,  has  been  overruled  for  the  establishment  of  a 
better  understanding  between  the  two,  at  first,  the  aborigines 
there  were  despised,  afterwards  feared,  but  at  last  respected. 

The  natives  were  surprised  when  they  found  they  were  at 
liberty  to  occupy  their  former  lands,  which  by  their  own 
customs  had  been  forfeited ; to  this  moderation  of  the 
Governor,  is  mainly  to  be  attributed  the  good  understand- 
ing which  has  since  prevailed.  This  war,  when  contrasted 
with  their  former  savage  ones,  prior  to  embracing  Christianity, 
is  remarkable  for  the  entire  absence  of  unnecessary  acts  of 
cruelty,  and  even  for  many  instances  of  kindly  feeling  towards 
their  foes,  which  showed  most  clearly  how  great  a change  the 
mild  precepts  of  the  Gospel  had  effected  in  the  native  mind. 

The  Governor  afterwards  met  Heke,  who  presented  him 
with  his  green  stone  mere,  which  is  now  preserved  in  the 
British  Museum ; shortly  afterwards  he  began  to  decline 
in  health,  and  died,  it  is  said,  from  the  effects  of  a beating 
by  his  wife,  he  was  only  about  forty  years  of  age ; his  body 
lay  in  state,  decorated  in  the  native  style,  for  some  time 
previous  to  its  interment,  and  was  visited  by  most  of  the 
natives  of  that  part  of  the  Island. 

Kawiti,  the  other  Chief,  died  about  1853,  having  previously 
embraced  Christianity,  and  been  baptized. 


Tapouka  and  Tuhawaiki. 

Tapouka  was  a great  Chief  of  the  Middle  Island,  the  whalers 
gave  him  the  soubriquet  of  Old  Wig,  he  was  celebrated  for 
his  great  cunning,  as  well  as  courage ; formerly  the  Dusky 
Bay  tribe  was  very  numerous,  it  is  now  all  but  extinct ; this 
wily  Chief  adopted  the  following  curious  expedient  to  surprise 


552 


TAPOUKA  AND  TUHAWAIKI. 


and  destroy  it,  being  a more  powerful  tribe  than  his  own ; he 
dressed  np  some  of  his  men  in  seal  skins,  and  sent  them  into 
the  vicinity  of  the  enemy,,  carefully  planting  his  men  in  ambush 
inland,  sufficiently  near  to  command  a view  of  what  was 
going  on,  the  natives,  unsuspecting  the  snare,  saw  these 
pretended  seals  sporting  about  in  the  breakers,  and  came  out 
to  catch  them ; when  the  whole  tribe  was  thus  drawn  out, 
and  whilst  intent  on  their  supposed  game,  out  rushed  Old 
Wig  and  his  tribe,  and  cruelly  massacred  them ; some  fled 
to  a neighbouring  island,  to  which  they  were  pursued,  and 
there  killed  in  the  caves  where  they  sought  to  conceal  them- 
selves ; my  informant  saw  their  bones  still  remaining,  a 
monument  of  this  cruel  adventure. 

Tapouka  died  of  the  measles  about  1833.  He  was  related 
to  another  great  Chief  named  Tuhawaiki,  or  Bloody  Jack, 
one  of  the  principal  men  of  the  Ngai  tahu,  and  a great 
supporter  of  the  whalers,  through  whom  he  became  pos- 
sessed of  considerable  wealth;  in  imitation  of  the  Governor 
of  New  South  Wales,  where  he  had  repeatedly  been,  he  kept 
a number  of  men  drilled  and  clothed  in  old  uniforms,  which 
the  Governor  had  given  him ; and  when  any  Europeans 
visited  him,  these  were  duly  drawn  out  and  paraded  before 
them  ; he  also  had  a vessel  of  his  own,  which  was  commanded 
by  one  of  his  European  friends  ; he  made  common  cause  with 
the  whalers  in  all  their  quarrels,  whilst  they,  in  return,  lent 
their  aid,  and  thus  enabled  him  to  obtain  the  mastery  over 
the  neighbouring  tribes. 

Tute  ounguku,  the  son  of  Tama  hara  nui,  invoked  the  aid 
of  Bloody  Jack  to  revenge  the  death  of  his  father,  who  was 
murdered  by  Te  Bauparaha,  that  Chief  was  surprised  by  him, 
and  nearly  all  his  party  cut  off,  he  himself  had  a very  narrow 
escape  of  falling  into  his  hands,  he  fled  in  a canoe,  to  lighten 
wffiich  he  threw  twenty  men,  women,  and  children,  into  the 
sea.  Tuhawaiki  lost  his  life  in  returning  from  the  Kaikoura 
in  an  open  boat,  in  company  with  a young  Chief  named 
Kopi,  who  was  in  another ; he  took  an  inner  passage  in  the 
dark,  and  was  capsized  in  the  surf,  and  although  his  com- 
panion was  called  to  come  to  his  aid,  h^  most  unfeelingly 


MAMAKU. 


553 


refused,  being  indignant  at  Bloody  Jack*s  having  appro- 
priated a larger  portion  of  money  received  for  the  sale  of 
some  land  than  he  was  entitled  to,  thus  he  perished. 

Mamaku. 

It  appeared  as  though  the  electric  telegraph  had  found  its 
way  to  New  Zealand,  for  no  sooner  had  the  war  broken  out 
in  the  north,  than  hostile  symptoms  were  simultaneously 
displayed  in  the  south.*  A few  of  the  natives  who  lived  in 
the  Hutt,  and  had  cultivations  there,  were  ordered  to  quit 
without  much  ceremony  or  favor  being  showed  them,  they 
were  told  the  land  had  been  sold  by  Te  Rauparaha,  they 
also  claimed  a right  to  it,  but  their  claims  were  disallowed ; 
after  much  disputing  on  both  sides,  a military  force  was 
stationed  in  the  midst  of  their  cultivations.  The  Governor 
requested  me  to  go  as  an  ambassador  to  them,  (they  were 
then  encamped  in  a dense  forest,)  to  say  that  if  they  quietly 
left,  he  would  see  compensation  was  given  for  their  crops. 
Kaperatehau,  the  principal  Chief,  agreed  to  his  terms,  and 
promised  to  leave  the  following  day ; unfortunately,  in 
the  meantime,  a constable  set  fire  to  their  village,  burnt 
their  houses,  their  neat  little  wooden  church,  and  even 
the  fences  around  their  graves;  this  wanton  act  greatly 
exasperated  them  : during  the  night,  they  revisited  the  site 
of  their  late  homes,  dug  up  the  bones  of  their  dead,  and 
carried  them  off  into  the  bush ; the  Governor  again  wished  me 
to  speak  to  them  ; I found  their  late  peaceable  feelings  had 
disappeared  ; they  pointed  to  a heap  covered  with  branches, 
and,  lifting  them  up,  I saw  the  remains  of  the  dead ; they 
told  me,  there  was  an  end  of  peace.  I left,  and  reported 
their  words. 

To  make  a beginning,  Rangihaeata  gave  a tomahawk  to 

* When  Ohaiawai  was  attacked,  and  so  many  of  our  brave  countrymen  fell, 
long  before  the  news  reached  the  settlers  in  the  south,  I saw  in  the  interior 
several  neatly- constructed  models  of  the  pa  and  its  defences,  made  with  fern- 
stalks,  to  show  the  way  they  had  gained  the  victory,  these  had  been  made  by 
messengers  sent  from  the  north,  to  publish  their  success  to  those  in  the  south. 


554 


MAMAKU. 


two  young  men,  and  bid  them  go  and  murder  some 
European  ; they  obeyed,  and  killed  a poor  fellow  named 
Gillespie  and  his  son,  who  were  quietly  at  work  when 
surprised,  such  was  the  native  custom ; before  dawn  on  the 
16th  May  1846,  an  attack  was  made  on  a party  stationed  at 
Boulcott’s  Farm  ; the  bugler,  quite  a lad,  was  struck  by  a 
tomahawk  on  the  right  arm,  whilst  sounding  an  alarm  ; the 
brave  youth  immediately  took  the  bugle  in  his  left  hand,  and 
continued  blowing,  until  a second  stroke  cleft  his  skull  in 
two ; the  men  rushed  from  their  sleeping  quarters,  and  made 
a gallant  stand,  drove  back  the  enemy,  and  maintained  their 
post,  with  the  loss  of  six  killed  and  four  severely  wounded  ; 
the  officer  in  command,  Lieutenant  Page,  showed  great 
courage  and  self-possession  on  the  occasion,  otherwise  he 
and  the  little  band  must  have  been  cut  off;  such  was  the 
beginning  of  the  war.  Mamaku,  a Chief  of  the  Nga-ti- 
rangi,  on  the  Upper  Wanganui,  was  then  on  a visit  to 
Wellington ; being  importuned  by  Kangihaeata,  he  joined 
the  hostile  natives,  and  virtually  became  their  leader ; they 
constructed  a strong  pa  at  Pauatahanui,  near  the  furthest 
extremity  of  Porirua  Harbour,  and  against  that  point  the 
efforts  of  the  military  were  next  directed ; the  hostile  natives, 
however,  finding  it  was  commanded  by  the  cannon,  abandoned 
it  on  their  approach,  and  selected  a more  tenable  spot  in  the 
Horokiri  Valley;  there  the  next  fight  took  place  on  the  13  th 
August  1846 ; several  of  our  men  fell  in  gallantly  storming 
the  heights  on  which  it  stood. 

The  Chiefs  then  conducted  their  men  along  the  mountain 
ranges  to  Waikanae,  and  after  several  skirmishes,  in  which  a 
few  prisoners  were  taken  by  our  Maori  allies,  and  one,  to  our 
disgrace,  hung  for  defending  his  native  land,  the  enemy 
reached  Poroutawhao,  where  Eangihaeata  remained  secure 
amidst  the  swamps  which  surrounded  the  place.  Mamaku 
there  left  him,  and  returned  to  Wanganui,  where  he  tried  to 
raise  a force  to  aid  his  former  ally ; he  came  down  upon  the 
town  with  about  eighty  men,  but  the  Uga  ti  Kuaka  and 
Putiki  natives  came  forward  and  defended  it ; the  inhabit- 
ants, to  mark  their  gratitude  for  this  seasonable  protection. 


A PAH  ON  THE  WANGANUI. 


MAMAKU. 


555 


gave  the  Chiefs  a public  dinner.  Before  Mamaku  and  his 
people  left,  he  said,  “ This  coat  is  too  small,  but  I shall 
return  at  Christmas  with  a warmer  one/*  intimating  that  he 
would  come  back  with  a larger  force,  and  attack  the  town. 

The  Putiki  Chiefs,  Hori  Kingi,  Hoani  Wiremu,  and  Te 
Mawae,  aware  of  the  critical  position  of  the  little  settlement, 
which  then  had  scarcely  a population  of  a hundred  men, 
immediately  wrote  to  Government,  and  recommended  the 
placing  of  a military  force  at  Wanganui,  for  its  defence,  and 
without  loss  of  time,  as  Mamaku  was  sure  to  return  with  a 
larger  force.  Their  advice  was  taken,  and  about  Christmas 
a detachment  of  the  58th,  under  Captain  Laye,  arrived,  a 
stockade  was  made,  the  Putiki  natives  giving  their  assistance 
in  cutting  the  timber  required. 

In  April,  one  of  those  unforeseen  events  occurred,  which 
unfortunately  interrupted  the  good  understanding  which  had 
hitherto  existed  between  the  military  and  the  Nga-ti-Ruaka ; 
a young  midshipman,  who,  with  Lieutenant  Holmes,  of  the 
Calliope,  was  stationed  at  Wanganui,  in  command  of  a gun- 
boat, had  employed  an  old  Chief  named  Hapurona,  to  make 
him  a Raupo  house,  for  which,  when  made,  the  boy  (for  he 
was  nothing  more)  refused  to  give  the  stipulated  price,  and 
in  joke  pretended  to  be  very  angry,  pulling  out  a little 
pocket  pistol,  and,  with  pretended  fierceness,  threatening  to 
shoot  him,  unfortunately  it  went  off,  the  ball  entered  the 
Chief’s  cheek,  and  lodged  somewhere  near  the  ear;  the 
natives  thought  it  was  done  on  purpose,  and  regarded  it 
as  a wilful  murder ; the  military,  instead  of  holding  an  open 
court  of  inquiry,  took  the  youth  into  the  stockade,  and 
closed  the  gates ; this  confirmed  them  in  the  idea  that  the 
act  was  intentional. 

On  the  evening  of  April  18th,  1846,  a party  of  six  young 
men,  or  rather  boys,  the  eldest  not  being  eighteen,  and  the 
youngest  only  twelve  years  old,  relations  of  the  wounded 
Chief,  in  order  to  have  payment  for  blood,*  and  bring  on  a 

* Blood. — The  shedding  of  blood  was  always  considered  a most  serious  thing, 
although  but  a drop  were  shed.  A gentleman  entering  my  house,  knocked 
his  head  against  a beam  and  cut  his  eyebrow,  so  that  blood  flowed  ; the 


MAMAKU. 


i>56 

war,  went  to  the  house  of  an  out-settler,  and  struck  at  him 
behind  the  neck  with  a tomahawk ; the  wound  was  not 
very  severe,  the  man  being  tall,  his  young  assailant  could  not 
reach  him.  He  went  into  his  house,  and  the  miscreants 
were  on  the  point  of  fleeing,  when  they  beheld  their  intended 
victim  running  away,  having  escaped  from  a back  window, 
no  sooner  did  he  abandon  his  helpless  family,  than  the 
fellows  began  to  assault  the  house,  his  poor  wife  put  her 
two  eldest  children  out  of  the  back  window  first,  and  then 
the  others,  following  them  herself  the  last,  and  leading  one 
of  the  youngest  by  the  hand ; the  miscreants  immediately 
they  saw  her,  split  her  skull  with  the  wood  axe,  and  that  of 
her  child  as  well,  they  then  ran  after  the  others  ; the  eldest 
boy  and  girl  each  carried  a baby,  they  struck  the  poor  boy 
down ; he  had  succeeded  in  concealing  himself,  but  when 
he  heard  his  mother’s  cries,  he  ran  to  her  aid ; the  babe  he 
carried,  rolled  into  the  fern,  and  as  it  was  growing  dark, 
escaped  observation ; they  next  cleft  the  skull  of  the  eldest 
daughter,  she  fell  with  an  infant  she  carried  belonging  to  a 
relative,  which  being  under  her  escaped,  another  poor  girl 
was  likewise  killed,  two  of  the  young  children  ran  into  a 
swamp,  and  concealing  themselves  amongst  the  flags  were  not 
observed ; the  natives  plundered  the  house,  and  set  it  on  fire. 

In  order  to  involve  the  Mission  natives  (who  were  always 
well  disposed  towards  the  Europeans)  in  a quarrel,  and  to 
make  the  latter  think  they  had  committed  this  murder,  the 
perpetrators  dropped  different  articles  taken  from  the  house 
along  the  road  leading  to  their  pa,  and  then  fled  up  the  river. 

natives  present  deplored  the  accident,  and  said  that,  according  to  their  law, 
the  house  would  have  been  forfeited  to  him,  and  as  they  were  of  his  party,  it 
would  have  been  their  duty  to  have  seen  it  given  up  to  him,  as  every  one  pre- 
sent was  affected  by  his  blood  being  shed.  In  the  same  way,  even  if  a canoe 
should  be  dashed  on  shore  in  a storm,  and  the  owner’s  life  endangered,  he 
thereby  acquires  a title  to  the  spot  he  is  thrown  on.  When  blood  is  shed,  it 
is  the  duty  of  every  one  related  to  the  person  who  has  suffered  to  seek  for  re- 
venge. It  does  not  matter  whether  it  be  the  individual  who  drew  it  or  any  one 
else  belonging  to  his  tribe  ; but  blood  must  be  shed  as  an  atonement  for  blood 
This  was  one  of  the  most  fertile  causes  of  war  in  former  days.  There  were  no 
cities  of  refuge  for  the  manslayer  to  flee  to  for  safety,  and  his  act  endangered  the 
lives  of  every  one  in  his  tribe. 


MAMAKU. 


557 


The  murder  made  a great  sensation,  but  no  one  ventured 
there  that  night  to  see  what  had  been  done  ; the  following 
morning,  several  of  the  settlers,  officers,  and  Putiki  natives, 
with  the  schoolmaster  of  the  Mission  Station,  went  to  the 
scene  of  this  tragedy  ; they  met  the  two  children  on  their 
way  to  the  Mission-house,  and  afterwards  found  the  eldest 
daughter,  to  their  amazement,  still  alive,  with  the  baby  in 
her  lap,  covered  with  her  blood,  although  the  cleft  in  her 
skull  extended  fully  six  inches  from  the  bridge  of  the  nose  to 
the  forehead  ; the  cold  of  the  night  had  staunched  the  blood 
and  saved  her  life,  she  recovered,  but  had  a fearful  broad 
seam,  nearly  a third  of  an  inch  wide,  as  a lasting  remem- 
brance of  that  dreadful  night ; she  and  the  two  infants  with 
the  corpses  were  brought  to  the  town ; immediately  the 
natives  heard  of  the  murder,  Hoani  Wirimu  and  the  Putiki 
Chiefs  held  a meeting;  they  resolved  to  capture  the  mur- 
derers, as  the  best  way  of  proving  their  innocence  of  the 
crime. 

They  crossed  over  the  same  night,  and  made  the  officer 
in  command  acquainted  with  their  intention ; at  first  he 
strangely  refused  his  consent,  but  by  the  advice  of  his  brother 
officers,  at  last  gave  his  permission.  Hoani  Wirimu,  taking 
several  determined  young  men  with  him,  set  off  with- 
out loss  of  time,  selecting  a light  and  swift  canoe,  they 
paddled  up  the  river,  justly  supposing  they  would  hasten 
that  way  into  the  interior,  calling  at  every  place  to  enquire, 
and  were  not  mistaken;  on  reaching  Ikunikau,  they  told 
a feigned  tale  to  the  natives  of  that  place,  who  immedi- 
ately manned  a large  canoe,  and  continued  the  pursuit : at 
last,  the  murderers  were  perceived ; the  Putiki  natives  laid 
down  in  the  canoe,  lest,  being  recognized,  the  object  of  their 
journey  should  be  suspected;  on  coming  alongside,  they 
jumped  up  and  seized  them  ; a struggle  ensued,  and  the 
canoe  was  capsized,  they  however  retained  their  grasp,  and 
secured  five  of  the  murderers,  one  escaped,  having  pre- 
viously left  their  company,  they  bound  their  prisoners, 
and  hastened  back ; on  reaching  Waipakura,  Maketu  wanted 
them  to  stay  there  for  the  night,  but  when  they  declined 


558 


MAMAKU. 


doing  so,  lie  fired  at  them;  they  proceeded  on  their  way, 
and  safely  delivered  up  their  charge  to  the  military ; not 
having  been  more  than  twenty-four  hours  from  the  time  of 
their  startings  during  which  they  had  paddled  seventy  miles. 
No  time  was  lost  in  trying  the  prisoners  by  court-martial ; 
this  commenced  on  the  24th  April  (25th  was  the  Sab- 
bath), and  on  the  26fch  they  were  executed,  the  boy  only 
being  spared,  as  it  was  proved  he  did  not  assist  in  the 
barbarous  deed,  but  he  actually  entreated  to  be  hung  with 
his  companions. 

These  youths  being  connected  with  the  Nga  ti  ruaka, 
caused  that  tribe  to  take  up  arms  ; they  were  joined  by 
the  Nga  ti  hau,  with  the  Chief  Mamaku  at  their  head,  and 
by  the  Patutokotoko ; they  speedily  raised  about  three  hun- 
dred men,  and  encamped  at  Papaiti,  where  they  strongly 
entrenched  themselves ; in  the  first  skirmish,  they  obtained 
possession  of  a part  of  the  town,  which  they  not  only  plun- 
dered, but  coolly  remained  quietly  feasting  on  the  ducks  and 
fowls  found  there,  of  which  they  cooked  some  dozens ; the 
military  and  inhabitants  took  shelter  every  night  in  two 
stockades  and  three  of  the  strongest  houses,  two  of  which 
were  surrounded  with  trenches,  the  town  then  presented  a 
singular  appearance,  its  entire  population  being  thus  shut 
up  in  those  few  fortified  spots,  all  herding  together,  and  from 
their  contracted  quarters,  much  sickness  and  death  ensued. 
Whilst  the  natives  were  thus  engaged  in  plundering,  a random 
shot  from  the  nearest  fortified  house,  went  through  one  of 
those  in  the  hands  of  the  hostile  natives,  and  killed  Maketiv,  a 
great  Chief,  whilst  in  the  act  of  loading  himself  with  plunder. 
The  gun-boat  was  of  great  service  in  keeping  the  enemy  in 
check,  its  bold  commander  being  always  in  advance. 

The  news  of  the  war  was  brought  to  Auckland,  where  I was 
then  attending  a Committee  of  the  Church ; the  Governor  left 
the  next  day  in  the  Inflexible , war  steamer,  taking  me  with 
him;  on  reaching  the  Wanganui  Heads,  24th  May,  a gun 
was  fired  to  give  notice  of  our  approach,  but  no  boat  came 
off ; at  last,  two  natives  were  seen  on  the  shore,  waving  a 
flag ; we  went  and  took  them  on  board,  one  was  Hoani 


MAMAKU. 


559 


Wiremu,  who  informed  ns  that  the  opposite  side  of  the  river 
was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  which  was  the  reason 
no  boat  had  been  sent  to  us  ; all  the  available  force  was 
then  embarked  in  the  ship's  boats,  without  loss  of  time, 
and  we  entered  the  river,  bands  of  natives  were  prowling 
about  on  the  town  side,  Hoani  Wirimu  sent  word  to  the 
Governor,  if  a force  were  sent  that  night  up  the  river,  it 
would  cut  off  all  the  canoes  of  the  enemy,  the  advice  was 
not  taken,  and  the  following  morning  they  were  removed 
higher  up  ; a great  demonstration  was  made  of  our  force, 
but  without  result,  several  skirmishes  took  place.  The 
natives  plundered  and  burnt  all  the  remaining  houses  of  our 
out-settlers,  and  drove  off  the  cattle  ; they  carried  on  their 
operations  so  near  that  the  people  in  the  town  could  hear 
them  thrashing  out  their  wheat.  This  state  continued  until 
the  1st  July,  when  the  enemy  enticed  a party  to  leave  the 
stockade  to  intercept  a few  natives,  who  were  trying  to  carry 
off  some  geese  ; when  they  got  near,  another  party  appeared, 
which  caused  a larger  force  to  be  sent  to  cover  the  first,  and 
thus  at  last  the  whole  of  the  military  were  drawn  out ; this 
has  been  dignified  as  the  Battle  of  St.  John's  Wood ; about 
three  men  were  killed  on  either  side,  and  ten  wounded ; it 
appeared  astonishing  to  a civilian  that  so  much  firing  could 
take  place  with  so  little  effect,  the  chief  observable  one  was, 
a great  downfall  of  rain  on  the  following  day;  the  natives 
early  the  next  morning  sent  a challenge  to  fight  on  the  open 
plain,  which,  not  being  accepted,  they  said,  we  cannot  remain 
any  longer,  but  must  go  and  plant  our  potatoes,  and,  to  the 
amazement  of  all,  they  broke  up  their  encampment,  and  left, 
thus  terminated  the  war.  The  natives  said  they  were  “rite” 
equal,  and  therefore  satisfied,  there  being  exactly  the  same 
number  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides  during  the  war, 
which  was  about  half-a-dozen  ; since  that  time  a good  feeling 
has  subsisted ; the  Maori  has  been  raised  in  the  European's 
estimation,  having  manifested  so  much  courage  and  skill,  as 
to  elicit  the  admiration  of  the  military,  and  he  has  clearly 
proved,  that  whilst  willing  to  be  one  with  us,  he  will  not 
suffer  himself  to  be  trampled  upon  ; the  patience  and  for- 


560 


MAMAKU. 


bearance  of  the  officer  in  command,  Colonel  Macleverty, 
also  effected  more,  perhaps,  than  our  arms  : he  showed  the 
natives  we  had  no  desire  to  fight  with  them,  but  only  to 
defend  our  settlers  against  their  attacks,  and  thus  the  kindly 
feeling  between  the  two  races  was  not  destroyed.  To  prove 
their  good  feeling,  of  their  own  accord  they  returned  some 
of  the  stolen  cattle,  and  then  demanded  the  bodies  of  the 
murderers,  which  being  given  up,  they  returned  most  of  the 
remaining  cattle,  and  since  that  period  have  lived  peaceably. 

A brief  account  may  here  be  added  of  the  murderer,  who 
escaped — Eangi  irihau.  Some  time  afterwards  I met  him  up 
the  river,  but  he  was  so  altered  that  at  first  I could  not 
recognize  him.  I asked  his  name,  he  laughed,  and  said  it 
was  Taniwa ; when  I found  who  he  was,  I spoke  to  him  of 
the  crime  he  had  committed,  and  told  him  although  he  had 
escaped  the  hand  of  man,  he  could  not  flee  from  that  of 
God,  and  therefore  I urged  him  to  pray  to  God  for  His 
forgiveness ; he  laughed  at  what  I said,  I felt  deeply  grieved 
at  his  hardness  of  heart,  and  bid  him  remember  my  words. 
Some  years  afterwards  I went  to  Tawitinui,  the  teacher  told 
me  Eangi  irihau  was  there,  and  at  the  point  of  death.  I 
went  to  see  him,  and  shall  never  forget  the  sight ; it  was 
winter,  there  was  a white  frost  on  the  ground ; I found  him 
in  an  old  cultivation,  some  little  distance  from  the  pa,  laid 
under  a miserable  little  shed  not  much  more  than  six  feet 
long  by  four  wide,  open  on  all  sides ; close  to  him  was  a 
wretched  little  fire,  and  his  all  but  naked  body  Was  covered 
with  sores  from  burns,  evidently  from  almost  touching  the 
embers  for  warmth,  he  had  only  a miserable  remnant  of  a 
mat  on,  near  was  a little  basket  with  some  small  potatoes, 
such  as  are  given  to  pigs ; his  color  was  that  of  the  ground, 
and  his  countenance  of  an  emaciated  old  man,  though  not 
much  more  than  twenty-three  or  four  years  old.  I inquired 
if  he  remembered  what  I had  said  to  him  when  I last  saw 
him,  that  there  was  no  fleeing  from  the  hand  of  God ; yes, 
he  said,  he  had  never  forgotten  my  words,  and  had  been  con- 
stantly crying  to  God  for  mercy ; I asked  if  he  prayed  and 
read  his  Bible,  he  pointed  to  twp  books  by  his  side,  which 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


561 


were  so  much  like  the  earth  in  color  as  to  escape  my  previous 
observation  ; he  said  he  was  constantly  reading  and  praying. 
I demanded  did  he  truly  repent  of  the  crime  he  had  com- 
mitted, he  said  he  did ; I then  told  him  Christ  died  even  for 
the  greatest  sinners,  and  if  we  truly  confessed  our  sins  His 
precious  blood  would  atone  for  them ; he  said  he  only  pleaded 
his  merits.  I then  asked  if  he  wished  to  be  baptized  before  he 
was  taken  away;  he  replied,  if  I thought  that  sacrament  might 
be  administered  to  him  ; under  such  circumstances,  I resolved 
to  do  so,  but  I found  even  his  own  friends  and  relatives  had 
deserted  him,  there  was  not  one  of  them  who  would  help  to 
carry  him  into  the  church,  at  last  two  strangers  volunteered, 
and  he  was  baptized  during  the  evening  service ; the  following 
morning  I left,  a few  days  after  on  my  return,  Rangi  irihau 
was  no  more.  Such  was  the  end  of  this  murderer. 

Mamaku  retired  to  the  Upper  Wanganui,  where  he  still 
lives ; he  became  a candidate  for  baptism ; having  lost  his 
three  wives,  he  said  it  was  a clear  indication  that  it  was  his 
duty  to  turn  to  God,  as  there  was  now  nothing  to  hinder  his 
doing  so  ; I baptized  Te  Karamu,  Mamaku,  Nga-tai,  all  these 
are  his  names;  his  new  one  being  Hemi  Topini,  (James  Stovin.) 


Manihera  and  Kereopa. 

Some  notice  in  this  work  is  due  to  the  memory  of  Mani- 
hera, especially  as  I have  given  brief  sketches  of  the  prin- 
cipal heathen  Chiefs.  The  contrast  between  their  lives  and 
that  of  a Christian  Chief,  will  forcibly  show  the  wonderful 
effect  and  power  of  the  Gospel  on  the  mind,  and  the  differ- 
ence between  the  fruits  of  the  spirit  and  those  of  the  flesh. 

Manihera  was  a Nga  ti  ruanui  Chief,  and  many  years  the 
head  teacher  of  his  tribe  at  Waokena  and  Whareroa.  He 
was  always  conspicuous  for  piety  and  attention  to  his  duties, 
and  instead  of  the  first  love  growing  cold,  his  appeared 
to  increase  with  time  ; indeed,  his  love  of  Christ  was  written 
upon  his  countenance.  At  the  Christmas  meeting  at  Wan- 
ganui, December  24th,  1846,  I held  a prayer-meeting  with 

o o 


562 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


my  teachers,  to  supplicate  the  Divine  blessing*  upon  our 
labors.  I felt  it  was  good  to  be  there,  the  fervency  and 
fluency  with  which  some  poured  forth  their  prayers  at  the 
throne  of  grace,  gave  a well-grounded  hope  that  they  had 
tasted  the  good  gift  of  God,  and  were  thus  able  to  proclaim 
the  Gospel  with  effect  amongst  their  fellow  countrymen. 
It  was  a most  interesting  season,  for  there  was  an  unusually 
large  assemblage  of  natives,  and  those  too  of  all  the  various 
tribes  inhabiting  that  part  of  the  island,  and  who,  a few 
years  ago,  could  not  have  been  induced  to  meet  on  any 
terms,  but  now  they  sat  quietly  by  each  other's  side  as 
brethren.  The  duty  of  aiding  those  still  sitting  in  heathen 
darkness  was  alluded  to,  when  Manihera  arose,  and  said, 
they  had  received  the  Ohristain  faith  from  the  distant 
country  of  England,  and  if  we  had  left  our  native  land,  in 
obedience  to  the  Lord's  command,  “To  go  into  all  the 
world,  and  preach  the  Gospel,"  surely  it  was  theirs  also 
to  do  the  same  amongst  their  own  benighted  countrymen, 
for  his  part,  he  willingly  offered  himself  as  a Missionary 
for  his  enemies  the  Taupo  natives,  who  were  still  heathen, 
Kereopa,  who  also  lived  at  Waokena,  said  in  former  times 
the  apostles  did  not  go  alone  to  preach  the  Gospel,  but  went 
two  and  two,  therefore  he  requested  to  be  his  companion  ; 
having  full  confidence  in  the  spiritual  state  of  the  former, 
their  offer  was  accepted,  and  they  were  solemnly  commended 
to  the  care  of  the  Most  High ; all  present  were  deeply  affected. 

Wiremu  Eruera  and  Tahana,  two  of  the  teachers,  came 
forward  and  said,  that  as  these  two  were  now  devoted  to  the 
Lord,  they  did  not  think  it  right  the  servants  of  God,  as 
ambassadors  of  Christ,  should  go  forth  without  suitable 
clothes  ; they  immediately  gave  each  a pair  of  black  trowsers, 
the  only  Sunday  ones  they  had  ; others  contributed  coats  ; 
one  person  gave  one  garment  and  another  gave  another,  until 
they  were  both  perfectly  provided. 

Afterwards  Manihera  and  his  companion  came  to  say,  that 
Enau,  the  brother  of  Herekiekie,  told  them,  they  had  better 
defer  their  proposed  journey  to  Taupo  until  his  return,  as 
their  going  before  would  be  like  walking  over  the  dead 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


563 


bodies  of  the  tribe,,  alluding  to  those  who  had  been  slain 
by  the  Nga  ti  ruanui  in  their  former  wars ; they  said,  that 
although  they  deferred  the  journey,  they  could  not  forget 
they  were  tapu,  or  devoted  to  the  Lord. 

It  is  necessary  here  to  state  the  cause  of  the  great  enmity 
which  the  Taupo  natives  entertained  towards  Manihera,  as 
belonging  to  the  Nga  ti  ruanui  tribe.  In  1841,  Tautekaand 
several  other  Taupo  Chiefs,  headed  a taua  (or  fight)  against 
Waitotara ; they  were  all  slain,  and  some,  who  were  spared 
after  the  battle,  and  had  food  given  them,  were  afterwards 
put  to  death  by  another  party,  which  was  indignant  at  their 
lives  having  been  thus  preserved,  this  act  was  never  for- 
gotten. The  Taupos  said,  after  they  had  shaken  hands  with 
their  prisoners,  and  fed  them,  they  killed  them  in  cold  blood, 
and,  therefore,  they  determined  to  murder  the  first  they 
could  meet  with  from  that  tribe,  as  a satisfaction  for  the 
treacherous  act. 

Manihera  and  his  companion  knew  this,  and  without  waiting 
until  Enau  returned,  wearied  with  his  long  absence,  their  zeal 
overcame  their  prudence  and  urged  them  to  commence  this 
mission  of  love.  On  the  6th  of  February  1847,  they  left 
Wanganui. 

One  part  of  the  duty  to  which  they  devoted  themselves, 
was  to  remonstrate  with  those  who  were  still  living  in  hos- 
tility to  the  British  Government,  as  well  as  to  proclaim  the 
Gospel,  and  urge  them  to  embrace  it.  They,  therefore,  first 
bent  their  steps  to  Poroutawao,  where  Rangihaeata  resided 
after  his  retreat  from  Porirua.  They  reached  his  abode, 
and  plainly,  but  affectionately,  spoke  to  him  ; he  replied 
to  their  address  by  laying  his  hand  edgewise  on  the  back 
of  his  own  neck,  intimating  to  them  that  they  were  expos- 
ing themselves  to  great  danger,  by  the  step  they  were 
taking ; but  he  treated  them  with  much  respect,  and  made 
a feast,  advising  them  to  proceed  no  further.  They  thence 
crossed  over  to  the  east  coast,  and  after  a very  long  journey, 
reached  Rotorua,  where  they  remained  several  days.  Mr. 
Chapman,  the  Missionary  there,  was  much  interested  with 
them.  I had  given  them  a letter  for  him,  and  by  mistake  it 

o o 2 


564 


MANIETERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


was  sealed  with  black  wax.  Mr.  Chapman  wrote  back  to 
me;  and  did  the  same.  Manihera  remarked,  this  is  a sure 
sign  of  death  for  us,  nevertheless  Grod^s  will  be  done.  On 
reaching  Wairewarewa,  there  was  a funeral  just  going  to 
take  place,  and  Manihera  was  invited  to  read  the  service, 
which  he  did,  remarking  he  should  soon  want  some  one  to 
perform  the  same  office  for  himself. 

They  then  went  on  to  Motutere,  there  they  were  advised 
to  go  to  Pukawa,  where  Iwikau  te  Heuheu  would  give  them 
a kind  reception,  and  were  told  to  be  satisfied  with  having 
come  thus  far,  for  the  tribe  they  were  so  desirous  of  visiting 
was  a very  wicked  one,  and  would  not  attend  to  them,  but 
most  probably  put  them  to  death.  Manihera  replied,  that 
the  great  object  for  which  they  came  was  to  preach  the 
Gospel  to  the  wicked,  and  therefore  the  reason  he  gave  why 
they  should  not  go,  was  the  very  one  to  confirm  their  intention  ; 
they  answered,  well,  then,  you  go  with  your  eyes  open  to  the 
consequences ; they  preached  at  Motutere,  thence  they  visited 
Waimarino,  and  went  on  to  Waiariki ; there  they  again 
received  a hearty  welcome  ; Manihera  preached  to  them  in 
a very  solemn  strain,  which  deeply  affected  his  hearers,  and 
in  the  morning  said  he  felt  that  his  time  was  at  hand,  and 
that  before  the  sun  set  he  should  be  an  inhabitant  of  another 
world,  that  during  the  night  he  had  been  in  the  Reinga  and 
met  many  of  his  deceased  friends,  who  told  him  he  should 
soon  be  with  them. 

A small  party  of  young  men,  about  ten  or  a dozen,  accom- 
panied these  two  devoted  men  on  their  way,  for  Waiariki  was 
the  very  next  place  to  Tokanu,  the  residence  of  Herekiekie, 
and  the  tribe  they  were  going  to  visit. 

Their  coming  was  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  pa,  and 
bearing  in  remembrance  the  death  of  their  relatives  at  Wai- 
totora,  and  their  duty  of  avenging  them,  Huia-tahi,  chiefly 
at  the  instigation  of  the  widow  of  Tauteka,  went  with  a small 
party,  and  laid  in  wait  for  them ; they  concealed  themselves 
in  a thicket  by  the  road  they  were  to  pass,  and  suffered  the 
young  men  of  Waiariki  to  go  on  before,  for  all  were  walking 
in  single  file,  the  usual  custom,  the  native  roads  not  allowing 


MANIHERA  AND  KERE0PA. 


565 


of  two  walking  abreast ; immediately  Manihera  and  Kereopa 
came  in  a line  with  them,  they  fired,  Manihera  was  only 
wounded,  but  his  companion  was  shot  dead.  Huiatahi,  an 
old  Chief,  nearly  seventy,  immediately  rushed  out  of  the 
thicket,  and  chopped  at  poor  Manihera  with  his  hatchet, 
but  his  blows  were  too  feeble  to  kill  him,  and  it  was  a long 
time  before  he  fell,  one  stroke  destroyed  his  sight,  he  then 
put  up  his  hand  as  it  were  to  wipe  away  the  blood  from  his 
eyes ; at  last  he  fell,  but  still  lingered  from  the  morning 
when  this  cruel  tragedy  was  perpetrated  until  sunset,  ejacu- 
lating prayers  for  his  murderers,  that  their  eyes  might  be 
opened  to  the  truth,  and  assuring  his  companions  that  all 
was  light  within.  Having  taken  his  Testament,  and  a kind 
of  journal  which  I requested  him  to  keep,  and  given  them  to 
one  of  the  young  men  who  accompanied  them,  with  the 
prayer  that  it  might  impart  the  same  comfort  to  him  which 
he  had  received  from  it,  he  expired. 

Such  was  the  end  of  these  two  devoted  men  : truly  they 
were  soldiers  of  the  Cross,  faithful  even  to  death,  and  doubt- 
less at  the  last  day  will  stand  in  their  lot,  clothed  in  spotless 
raiment  of  white,  in  the  holy  company  of  those  who  have 
sealed  their  faith  with  their  blood. 

Their  companions,  who  were  unarmed,  loudly  expressed 
their  indignation  at  this  treacherous  deed  ; they  carried  the 
bodies  back  to  Waiariki,  and  afterwards  buried  them  with 
great  solemnity  near  their  pa,  erecting  a double  fence  around 
their  graves  ; to  mark  the  spot  where  these  faithful  soldiers 
of  the  Cross  fell,  they  scooped  out  two  hollow  places  in  the 
turf ; not  satisfied  with  this,  they  immediately  sent  round 
to  all  the  Christian  villages,  exhorting  them  to  take  up  arms 
and  avenge  so  unmerited  a death ; they  likewise  wrote  to 
me,  and  bade  me  lose  no  time  in  coming  to  Taupo.  They 
were  killed  on  the  12th  March,  and  on  the  22nd  the  news 
reached  us,  we  were  all  deeply  affected;  the  following  day 
a prayer-meeting  was  held,  I told  the  natives  I had  no  doubt 
the  Almighty  would  over-rule  this  sad  event  for  good,  and 
that  He  in  whose  cause  they  had  shed  their  blood,  would  not 
suffer  it  to  sink  into  the  ground  unrequited,  for  the  blood  of 


566 


MAN1HERA  AND  KEREOrA. 


the  Saints  is  the  seed  of  the  Church,  that  Paul  was  not  only- 
consenting  to  Stephen's  death,  but  also  the  keeper  of  the 
garments  of  those  who  stoned  him,  and  yet  that  very  man, 
in  after  days,  became  the  chiefest  of  the  Apostles ; so  might 
this  tribe,  which  had,  through  ignorance,  consented  to  and 
joined  in  this  cruel  murder,  hereafter  become  as  eminent  for 
its  love  to  God  and  devotion  to  His  service. 

I was  rejoiced  to  find  that  Herekiekie,  the  Chief  of  Tokanu, 
was  not  at  home  when  the  crime  was  committed,  and  that, 
on  his  return,  he  was  greatly  incensed  with  his  people  for 
thus  bringing  such  a stain  on  his  place. 

I wrote  to  Manihera’s  friends,  expressing  the  hope  that 
they  would  take  a Christian  view  of  the  sad  affair,  and  not 
make  it  a pretext  for  future  bloodshed.  On  the  1st  of  April, 
a large  meeting  was  held  to  hear  the  letters  of  Manihera's 
friends  read,  and  to  decide  what  should  be  done,  for  there 
was  a very  general  feeling  of  indignation  against  the  mur- 
derers ; the  letters  were  read,  they  all  breathed  a very 
Christian  spirit,  the  tenor  of  them  was,  that  they  were  not 
angry  though  sorrowful  for  their  friends'  death  ; that  as  they 
had  died  in  the  Lord's  cause,  they  should  leave  it  with  Him, 
and  not  in  the  old  way  demand  blood  for  blood. 

William  Tauri,  the  head  teacher,  who  was  also  a Taupo 
Chief,  expressed  his  entire  concurrence  in  the  sentiments 
which  the  Nga  ti  ruanui  had  expressed,  and  made  use  of  the 
following  beautiful  simile,  to  show  that  although  a minister 
or  teacher  might  be  taken  away,  yet  that  event,  however 
deplorable,  would  not  hinder  the  spread  of  the  Gospel ; a 
minister,  he  said,  was  like  a lofty  Kahikatea  tree  full  of  fruit, 
which  it  sheds  on  every  side  around,  causing  a thick  grove 
of  young  trees  to  spring  up ; so  that  although  the  parent 
tree  may  be  cut  down,  its  place  is  thus  more  than  supplied 
by  those  which  proceed  from  it. 

Another  said,  “ If  a soldier  of  the  Queen  were  to  be  killed, 
and  we  were  bidden  to  arise,  should  we  not  do  so  ? And  now 
that  a soldier  of  Christ  is  murdered,  shall  we  sit  still  ? When 
Paul,  the  teacher  of  Onetea,  was  drowned  in  the  Wanganui 
river,  did  not  his  friends  come  and  carry  away  his  body  to  be 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


567 


interred  amongst  his  own  friends  and  relatives,  and  shall 
the  bodies  of  Kereopa  and  Manihera  be  left  amongst  the 
heathen?-”  But  another  immediately  arose,  and  said,  “Why 
should  we  be  thinking  about  the  bodies  of  our  friends  and 
their  resting-place  ? we  know  that  although  they  are  decom- 
posing amongst  their  enemies,  yet  their  spirits  are  alive  with 
God  ; I know  what  we  should  have  done  in  former  days,  but 
what  would  have  been  the  good  ? If  we  fight,  we  only 
increase  our  sorrow  by  multiplying  the  dead  ; let  us  not  fear 
those  who  can  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more 
that  they  can  do ; let  us  listen  to  our  Minister,  and  take  his 
advice.”  Tahana,  one  of  our  principal  Chiefs,  and  also  a 
teacher,  said,  “ At  baptism  we  are  made  the  soldiers  of 
Christ ; the  soldiers  of  the  Queen  perish,  but  those  of  Christ 
live  for  ever ; Manihera  and  Kereopa  were  true  soldiers  of 
Christ ; can  we  doubt  their  happy  state  ? ” Another  re- 
marked, “ Although  their  blood  had  been  poured  out  on  the 
ground,  it  was  no  proof  that  God  was  angry  with  them,  for 
Christ's  blood  - also  was  shed — that  the  blood  of  the  people 
of  God  fertilized  the  earth  ; and  although  these  two  were 
dead,  we  should  not  be  discouraged,  but  send  two  more  to 
preach  the  Gospel ; and  if  they  also  were  killed,  two  others  ; 
and  if  they  perished,  still  keep  supplying  their  places  until 
the  summer  came,  and  then,  perhaps,  their  enemies  would 
give  in,  and  be  converted.” 

Several  others  addressed  the  meeting  in  similar  terms.  It 
was  then  decided  that  the  matter  should  be  left  entirely  with 
me  ; I proposed  to  visit  the  tribe  which  had  murdered  Mani- 
hera and  his  companion,  as  well  as  the  Christian  natives  of 
Taupo,  to  allay  the  excitement  these  deaths  had  made,  and 
to  exhort  the  murderers  to  repentance. 

On  the  5th  of  April  I left  home,  taking  with  me  half-a- 
dozen  of  my  teachers,  and  found  the  natives  up  the  river  in 
a very  excited  state,  and  extremely  hostile  to  the  British 
Government  and  to  the  Putiki  natives  as  well,  for  having 
made  common  cause  with  the  Europeans.  I was  several 
times  threatened,  and  advised  to  return;  but  on  the  21st  we 
safely  reached  Pukawa ; a rumour  had  preceded  us,  that  we 


568 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


were  coming  with  a party  of  three  or  four  hundred  men  to 
avenge  the  death  of  Manihera.  Te  Heuheu  received  us  with 
every  demonstration  of  joy,  and  after  the  usual  tangi,  or 
crying,  was  concluded,  he  addressed  us  in  a very  long 
speech  : he  said  that  the  great  and  lofty  had  fallen,  and  that 
all  was  dark  on  their  account,  he  bade  us  welcome,  what- 
ever might  be  the  object  of  our  coming— whether  to  cover 
up,  or  uncover,  the  crime ; he  said,  this  land  has  been 
polluted  with  blood  from  the  time  of  our  first  ancestors  to 
this  day ; my  brother,  my  child,  my  father  Te  Teira,  wel- 
come ! Go  you  to  Huiatahi,  you  are  strong : I cannot ; 
donT  say  I conceal  my  thoughts.”  I told  them  this  was 
my  second  visit  on  account  of  the  dead ; first  for  Te  Heuheu, 
and  now  I came  for  Manihera  and  Kereopa  : the  falling  of  a 
mountain  had  crushed  the  one,  but  the  others  had  been 
basely  murdered,  when  they  only  came  as  messengers  of 
peace : that  Heuheu  did  not  gain  his  rank  by  murder — he 
was  too  noble  to  use  such  means  : that  if  a tribe  thus  sought 
to  prosper,  it  was  as  if  a man  were  to  expect  his  house  to 
stand  firm  though  built  on  a bog ; I was  indeed  grieved — - 
not  for  Manihera  and  his  companion,  for  they  were  happy, 
and  had  received  their  reward,  but  that  any  could  be  guilty 
of  such  a crime  ; they  had  heard  a rumour  of  our  coming  with 
several  hundred  men  to  avenge  their  deaths  : I had  indeed 
come,  and  they  beheld  my  party  ! our  only  weapon  was  the 
Word  of  God ! we  came,  not  to  avenge,  but  to  make  peace 
— judgment  we  left  with  God  ; I was  not  sorry  for  the  indig- 
nation which  the  natives  of  the  other  side  of  the  lake  had 
shown  against  the  murderers— for  the  dead  were  their  guests, 
and  they  were  murdered  in  their  presence : had  they  not 
shown  their  abhorrence  at  the  deed,  I should  have  thought 
they  had  connived  at  it ; but  we  came  to  make  an  end  of  the 
quarrel,  and  the  terms  were,  that  peace  must  now  be  made 
with  the  Nga  ti  ruanui — as  it  had  been  purchased  with  the 
blood  which  was  shed. 

About  an  hour’s  pull  on  the  morrow  brought  us  to  Tokanu. 
We  passed  by  the  mournful  scene  of  Te  Heuheu*  s glory  and 
destruction  : the  grass  had  not  yet  grown  over  the  common 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


569 


tomb  of  bis  tribe.  The  long-extended  line  of  clay,  which  had 
covered  up  his  pa,  formed  a striking  monument  to  remind  us 
that  “ in  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death  ” ; the  surrounding 
lake  was  strictly  tajpu,  and  the  wild  fowl,  as  if  conscious  of  their 
security,  allowed  us  to  pass  without  taking  wing ; when  we 
entered  the  pa,  which  we  did  in  a long  line  headed  by  myself, 
we  received  a suspicious  welcome  from  a few  females ; we 
sat  down  in  silence  : the  usual  crying  when  friends  meet  was 
omitted ; opposite  to  us  were  Herekiekie  and  the  murderers  of 
our  poor  friends,  all  armed ; not  a word  was  spoken  on  either 
side  for  full  a quarter- of-an-hour ; every  now  and  then  fresh 
parties  kept  arriving,  most  of  them  carrying  their  guns;  at 
last  Hemapo,  the  next  to  Herekiekie,  arose ; he  acknowledged 
the  sin  committed,  and  deplored  that  we — his  relatives 
and  a Minister — should  thus  be  compelled  to  come  without 
exchanging  the  usual  tangi , and  receiving  the  accustomed 
welcome ; he  said  they  had  heard  of  our  coming  with  four 
hundred  men  armed  to  cut  them  off,  but  if  that  was  our 
intention  they  were  not  alarmed,  they  defied  us ; he  said 
much  more,  but  not  liking  on  this  occasion  to  take  notes, 
when  we  knew  not  how  we  were  to  be  received,  much  is 
forgotten.  Tahana  arose,  and  spoke  for  some  time  very 
earnestly,  telling  them  that  their  present  work  was  of  a new 
kind — that  even  their  forefathers  would  have  been  ashamed 
of  it— and,  therefore,  our  visit  was  in  a new  way,  had  we  not 
been  influenced  by  a kindly  feeling,  we  should  not  have  come 
at  all,  that  now  we  could  not  give  them  our  hands,  or  join 
in  the  cry  of  friendship  ; one  of  the  opposite  party  then 
got  up,  and  said,  he  had  heard  that  we  were  going  to 
Auckland  to  get  Te  Werowero  to  come  against  them ; 
they  were  all  one,  but  prepared  for  the  worst;  they  were 
not  sorry  for  the  deed,  and  could  not  forget  the  death  of 
their  friends.  Te  Huiatahi  said.  His  heart  was  not  at  all 
dark  for  what  he  had  done ; he  did  not  however  wish  to 
continue  the  evil,  or  to  carry  it  further— it  was  done  in  ac- 
cordance with  their  ritenga  (custom).  William  and  another 
of  my  natives  also  spoke — then  I addressed  them,  and  told 
them,  it  is  true  we  have  come  to  fight,  and  have  brought  a 


570 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


large  army  with  us,  which  they  saw  before  them,  and  that  we 
were  all  armed  with  a powerful  weapon — the  Word  of  God 
— which  I held  up  before  me,  that  this  was  my  first  sor- 
rowful visit  to  their  place,  but  still  it  was  a visit  of  love, 
or  I should  have  stayed  at  home;  we  did  not,  it  was  true, 
tangi  (cry)  with  our  eyes,  but  we  did  with  our  hearts  : we 
had  come,  not  to  avenge,  but  to  avoid  further  shedding 
of  blood ; the  dead  were  the  servants  of  God,  and  died 
in  doing  His  will,  we  left  vengeance  to  him  who  has 
said,  “ Vengeance  is  mine!  I will  repay,  saith  the  Lord,” 
we  trusted  that  they  would  be  led  to  see  the  enormity  of 
their  crime,  and  repent  of  it : that  now  the  blood  of  Kereopa 
and  Manihera  had  been  shed,  they  could  not  be  brought 
again  to  life  on  earth — they  were  in  the  enjoyment  of  their 
reward,  and  it  was  great : but  sufficient  blood  had  been  shed, 
and  it  was  not  our  wish  that  any  should  avenge  their  death  : 
they  had  killed  them,  it  is  true,  in  accordance  with  their 
ancient  customs,  and  we  wished  their  blood  to  be  the  price 
of  a permanent  peace  between  the  tribes,  that  henceforth 
love  might  prevail : that  if  they  agreed  to  my  proposal,  one 
of  their  Chiefs  should  go  back  with  my  children  and  make 
peace  with  the  Nga  ti  ruanui. 

Herekiekie  jumped  up,  and  said  he  was  rejoiced  to  hear 
me  speak  as  I had  done ; he  fully  agreed  to  my  proposal ; 
although  he  was  not  one  of  the  murderers — for  if  he  had 
been  at  home,  he  should  have  prevented  the  deed — still  it 
was  done  by  his  tribe  ; henceforth,  the  Nga  ti  ruanui  might 
come  to  his  pa,  and  they  should  be  welcome  ; he  thanked 
me  for  coming,  and  hoped  now  we  should  be  friends  again, 
that  we  should  eat  with  them  and  exchange  salutations ; one 
thing  only  remained,  and  that  was  to  know  whether  the  Nga 
ti  ruanui  would  agree  to  my  proposal ; Aperaniko  here  rose 
up,  and  said,  their  Minister  was  the  Nga  ti  ruanui ; he  came 
as  their  representive  ; they  had  left  all  with  him ; and  what- 
ever he  did  they  would  agree  to.  I told  them,  sorrowful  as 
the  Nga  ti  ruanui  were,  they  sought  no  revenge,  but  left  all 
to  God.  It  was  arranged  that  William  and  Tahana  should 
remain,  and  finally  settle  who  should  go  with  them  as  ambas- 


MANIHERA  AND  KEREOPA. 


571 


sadors  of  peace ; and  then,  though  pressed  to  eat  or  shake 
hands,  we  arose,  and  silently  returned  to  our  canoe,  they 
followed,  and  bade  us  farewell.  I was  thankful  that  the 
affair  had  so  far  terminated  satisfactorily,  and  I felt  I could 
not  be  sufficiently  grateful  for  this  answer  to  my  prayers 
that  I might  be  made  instrumental  in  putting  an  end  to 
what  had  threatened  to  bring  on  a general  war;  the  Chris- 
tian natives,  both  here,  at  Rotorua,  and  even  Waikato,  were 
prepared  to  rise.  I rejoiced  to  see  their  abhorrence  of  the 
deed ; but  if  they  were  to  take  up  the  cause,  the  evil  would 
only  be  increased.* 

Thence  we  went  to  Waiariki,  the  place  where  our  dear 
departed  friends  last  slept,  and  near  to  which  they  are 
buried.  A neat  double  fence  surrounded  the  sacred  spot, 
we  sang  a hymn  standing  around  it,  and  I spoke  from 
the  words,  “ Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord 
from  henceforth : Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest 
from  their  labours.”  Many  a tear  was  shed ; we  kneeled 
down,  and  I offered  up  a prayer — that  the  same  hope  which 
had  sustained  Manihera  and  Kereopa,  and  carried  them 
triumphantly  through,  might  sustain  us  in  our  dying  hour, 
and  that  their  precious  blood,  here  poured  out,  might  not 
fall  into  the  ground  in  vain,  but  be  blessed  to  the  conversion 
of  those  by  whom  it  was  shed,  and  become  the  means  of 
dispelling  the  darkness  of  this  tribe  to  spiritual  things. 

Hence  we  reached  Wai  Marino,  a Christian  pa,  where  a 
very  indignant  feeling  prevailed  on  account  of  the  murder ; 
they  doubted  the  sincerity  of  the  parties ; but  still,  I think, 
will  accede  to  my  wishes  for  peace ; we  were  hospitably 
entertained,  and  remained  there  for  the  night ; in  my  dis- 
course, I told  them,  if  they  were  to  take  up  arms  and  shed 
blood  they  would  just  be  doing  what  the  Devil  would  wish 
them,  as  the  most  likely  way  of  getting  them  again  into  his 
power.  I addressed  them  from  the  verse,  “ An  eye  for  an 
eye,  and  a tooth  for  a tooth.” 


* Hikairo,  the  Chief  of  Rotorua,  afterwards  did  make  war  on  the  murderers, 
and  plundered  their  place. 


572 


MANIHERA  AND  KBREOPA. 


We  reached  Motutere  about  noon  the  next  day.  Here 
we  had  the  usual  cry,  and  then  speeches ; they  first  bade  us 
welcome,  but  inquired  what  was  the  object  of  our  coming ; 
was  it  to  see  the  Church  trampled  under  foot,  and  the  ser- 
vants of  God  slain  ? Was  it  to  give  our  hands  to  the  mur- 
derers ? If  this  were  the  case,  Rangipo*  would  be  closed 
against  us,  and  there  would  be  no  coming  here  in  safety ; 
others  spoke  in  the  same  strain ; I said,  I might  also  ask 
them  what  was  the  good  of  their  words,  did  God  establish 
His  Church  here  that  it  might  continue  war  ? was  not  that 
the  work  of  the  Devil  ? had  they  not  sufficiently  felt  the 
evil  of  it  in  former  days  to  prevent  their  commencing  it 
again  ? would  God  permit  His  Church  to  be  trampled  under 
foot  ? could  they  extinguish  the  light  of  the  sun  ? God 
was  the  head  of  the  Church,  and  we  were  the  members 
of  it — was  it  right  that  the  members  should  act  without  the 
head  ? The  foundation  of  the  Church  was  love — would  it  be 
seen  if  we  rose  up  and  killed  one  another  ? was  it  not  our 
safest  way  to  leave  all  with  God,  and  trust  to  Him  for  the 
termination  of  this  said  affair  ? 

I also  sent  a letter  to  Hikairo,  and  all  the  teachers  of 
Rotorua,  dissuading  them  from  taking  up  arms  to  avenge 
these  murders,  but  recommending  them  to  leave  all  with  God, 
and  left  Taupo  with  the  conviction  that  those  gloomy  hills 
of  darkness'”  would  soon  be  made  light  by  the  bright  beams 
of  the  Gospel ; I was  accompanied  to  Auckland  by  a native, 
who  was  deputed  by  his  tribe  to  attend  the  Central  Com- 
mittee, and  apply  for  a minister  to  be  sent  to  Taupo  ; at 
Auckland  we  received  the  news  of  a barbarous  murder  of  a 
settler's  family  at  Wanganui,  this  hastened  my  return ; the 
Governor  kindly  offered  me  a passage  in  the  Inflexible , war 
steamer,  to  Wanganui,  in  which  he  also  went  himself;  and 
grieved  was  I to  find,  on  my  arrival,  what  a change  had  taken 
place  during  my  absence ; a Chief  had  been  nearly  killed  by 
the  carelessness  of  a young  midshipman,  whose  pistol  by  some 
means  went  off ; when  another  heathen  and  hostile  Chief  im- 
mediately went  and  murdered  the  family  already  alluded  to 

* The  name  of  the  road  from  Wanganui  across  the  Tongariro  plains  to  Taupo. 


MANIHERA  ANT)  KEREOPA. 


573 


in  order  to  bring  the  Christian  natives  into  collision  with  the 
military ; the  Pntiki  natives,  with  a very  laudable  desire  of 
vindicating  their  character,  went  and  arrested  the  murderers, 
four  of  whom  were  executed,  this  act  caused  the  smothered 
flames  of  war  to  break  out ; a large  hostile  force,  amounting 
to  five  hundred  men,  was  soon  collected,  which  commenced 
with  burning  the  houses  of  out-settlers,  and  slaughtering  their 
cattle  ; but  after  a few  months,  war  passed  away,  and  peace 
revisited  us.  I therefore  lost  no  time  in  again  paying  Taupo  a 
visit ; the  Tokanu  natives,  according  to  their  promise,  had 
sent  two  of  their  Chiefs  to  the  Nga  ti  ruanui,  and  had  made 
peace  : they  were  very  kindly  and  hospitably  received,  and 
the  long  feud  which  had  existed  between  their  respective 
tribes,  was  terminated.  Here,  then,  were  the  first  fruits  of 
Manihera*  s death  seen — it  caused  peace. 

I took  with  me  to  Taupo  a young  Chief  named  Piripi, 
from  Waokena,  the  successor  to  Manihera,  as  teacher  of 
his  place,  that  he  might  return  the  visit  of  the  Tokanu 
Chief,  the  Nga  ti  ruanui,  however,  would  not  permit  him 
to  go,  unless  he  went  in  my  company ; we  safely  reached 
Tokanu,  and  a feast  was  made  in  honor  of  our  arrival ; I 
found  a very  different  feeling  to  that  formerly  displayed ; all 
expressed  a desire  for  instruction.  I proposed,  therefore, 
as  a token  of  their  sincerity,  that  we  should  go  and  hold 
service  by  the  martyrs*  graves ; they  agreed  to  my  wish,  and 
the  inhabitants  in  a body  accompanied  me  there  ; we  passed 
by  the  spot  where  they  fell,  which  was  marked,  as  already 
said,  by  two  hollow  places.  On  reaching  the  graves,  I 
preached  to  the  assembly ; the  sight  was  affecting  : there 
were  the  memorials  of  the  deed  before  us,  and  there  were 
the  perpetrators  of  it,  with  downcast  heads  and  tearful  eyes, 
listening  to  that  Gospel  which  Manihera  and  his  companion 
came  to  proclaim  ; they  reminded  me  of  Saul,  once  con- 
senting to  the  death  of  Stephen,  afterwards  a convert  to  the 
same  faith,  which  he  had  before  opposed. 

We  returned  to  the  pa,  and  Huiatahi,  the  murderer,  him- 
self proposed  a Missionary  should  be  sent  to  his  place  at 
Rotoaira,  and  be  stationed  at  Poutu,  where  he  would  give  a 


574 


ANDREW  POWERS. 


most  suitable  spot,  and  also  erect  both  a Church  and  a 
Mission-house ; many  came  forward  as  candidates  for  baptism. 
This  was  indeed  a great  and  wonderful  change,  and  it  was 
evidently  the  Lord's  doing. 

I left,  with  the  promise  of  again  returning  as  soon  as  the 
Church  should  be  completed,  to  open  it,  and  receive  the 
first  fruits  of  the  place  in  it,  leaving  Piripi  behind,  as  the 
Chiefs  were  desirous  that  he  should  remain  and  partake  of 
their  hospitality. 

After  some  time,  I received  an  announcement  that  the 
Church  was  completed,  and  only  wanted  me  to  open  it. 
Accordingly,  I went  to  Rotoaira,  accompanied  by  some  of 
my  teachers  ; we  were  met  at  some  distance  from  the  pa 
by  a party  bringing  horses  for  us ; one  native,  immediately 
we  were  seen,  returned  to  give  intelligence  of  our  approach ; 
we  were  received  with  every  demonstration  of  joy. 

The  Church  was,  internally,  extremely  neat,  I may  say  an 
elegant  building;  externally  covered  with  rushes,  and  re- 
minding me  of  the  passage  in  Isaiah,  “ in  the  place  where 
dragons  laid  shall  be  reeds  and  rushes."  I had  no  sooner 
taken  some  refreshment,  than  a crowd  of  candidates  for 
baptism  surrounded  my  tent,  I received  about  thirty.  He- 
mapo,  the  brother  of  Herekiekie,  had  already  been  baptized 
by  Mr.  Brown,  and  now  I appointed  him  the  teacher  for  the 
new  Church.  The  service  of  the  Sabbath  was  very  solemn. 
I administered  the  sacrament  to  my  own  party,  and  to 
Hemapo,  and  then  received,  during  the  evening  service, 
these  fruits  of  Manih era's  death. 

On  the  Monday,  when  I preached  to  them  before  my 
departure,  I felt  so  overpowered  by  the  sight,  that  I could 
not  proceed,  and  when  I left,  the  entire  congregation  followed 
me  for  nearly  a mile,  and  with  many  tears  bade  me  farewell. 
Thus  terminated  the  Mission  of  Manihera  and  Kereopa. 

Andrew  Powers. 

Some  of  the  adventures  of  our  sailors  in  the  early  days  of 
our  acquaintance  with  New  Zealand  are  interesting  ; of  such 
is  the  following  : — 


ANDREW  POWERS. 


575 


On  the  14th  January  1831,  a man  named  Andrew  Powers 
entered  the  Wanganui  river ; he  formed  one  of  a boat’s  crew 
belonging  to  Joe  Rowe,  a trader  in  preserved  human  heads, 
it  came  from  Rapiti  on  a trading  expedition ; there  were 
three  white  and  one  colored  men  with  him,  they  rowed  as 
far  as  a sandy  bight,  adjoining  the  South  Bluff,  where  they 
landed  to  dine,  and  whilst  doing  so,  a party  of  natives 
joined  company,  they  had  some  cooked  food  with  them, 
two  baskets  of  which  were  given  to  the  party.  Whilst  eating 
their  dinner,  Puta,  one  of  the  natives,  went  and  sat  in  the 
boat;  Joe  Rowe,  called  out  to  Powers  to  go  and  turn  him 
out,  he  replied,  you  had  better  do  so  yourself,  as  you 
know  more  about  Maories  than  I do  ; Joe  then  got  up,  and 
asked  him  what  he  wanted  in  the  boat ; the  native  replied, 
to  look  at  him ; the  sailor  commanded  him  to  leave,  and 
when  the  native  continued  to  sit  still,  he  took  hold  of  his 
mat  to  drag  him  out,  the  native  immediately  arose,  drew 
out  his  patiti  (hatchet)  from  beneath  his  mat,  and  cleft  his 
skull.  Powers  went  to  help  his  comrade,  when  a native 
named  Wetu  knocked  him  overboard,  and  as  he  laid  hold  of 
the  boat  with  one  hand,  they  immediately  struck  him  over  it, 
and  made  him  let  go ; he  then  put  his  hand  on  the  side  of 
their  canoe,  and  got  in ; the  natives  pulled  him  down  on  his 
belly,  one  sitting  on  his  legs  and  another  on  his  arms,  and  so 
held  him  for  some  time,  when  he  was  permitted  to  look  up, 
he  found  three  of  his  comrades  had  been  killed,  but  the  man 
of  color  was  spared ; they  cut  off  the  heads  of  Rowe  and 
another,  and  placed  them  to  steep  in  a little  water  hole  above 
the  cliff,  down  which  a small  stream  trickled.  One  of  these 
heads  was  afterwards  dried  in  the  usual  way  for  sale ; the 
other  being  very  much  chopped  about  in  the  face  with  the 
hatchet,  he  thought  was  not  preserved;  the  bodies  of  two  of 
the  victims  were  cut  up  and  eaten  ; afterwards,  when  Powers 
had  been  some  time  with  them,  he  asked  what  had  become 
of  the  third  man  who  was  killed,  as  he  only  saw  two  of  their 
heads ; they  told  him,  when  he  was  killed  he  cried,  and  their 
atuas  said,  they  were  not  to  eat  the  bodies  of  men  who  cried 
from  fear  of  death,  lest  it  should  make  them  cowards  ; so 
they  buried  him  in  the  sand. 


576 


ANDREW  POWERS. 


At  the  time  when  this  affair  took  place,  there  were  no 
natives  residing  near  the  sea ; Pntiki  had  been  destroyed 
two  years  before  by  Te  Rauparaha ; the  men  who  seized 
the  boat  were  Taupo  natives,  and  immediately  afterwards 
went  up  the  river ; Powers  accompanied  Tapuae  and  his  son 
Wetu,  the  black  man  going  with  another  division  of  the 
party  he  saw  no  more  of  him,  those  with  Wetu  returned 
by  Wanganui-a-te-ao  and  Rotoaira ; as  they  went  up  the 
river,  the  people  of  a pa  they  stopped  at,  gave  Tapuae 
and  Wetu  a basket  of  human  flesh,  and  were  going  to  give 
some  to  Powers,  but  Tapuae  told  them  not  to  do  so,  as 
foreigners  did  not  eat  that  kind  of  food,  and  Tapuae  said, 
neither  would  his  son  touch  it ; he  therefore  returned  the 
present ; the  natives,  astonished,  enquired — what  is  he  tapu, 
that  he  cannot  eat  human  flesh  ? No,  replied  his  father,  the 
smell  of  it  always  makes  my  son  sick,  (a  convincing  proof 
there  were  some  at  least  whose  feelings  revolted  at  such 
unnatural  food). 

On  reaching  Taupo,  Te  Wetu  said  he  must  take  him  to 
see  the  king;  so  they  went  to  Waitaha-nui,  and  there  placed 
him  in  the  verandah  of  a house,  in  a little  time  a native 
brought  a new  floor  mat,  and  spread  it  upon  the  ground,  and 
bid  him  sit  upon  it ; shortly  afterwards,  they  said,  our  king 
is  coming,  and  a very  stout  majestic  native  made  his  appear- 
ance, who  came  and  sat  by  his  side  on  the  mat ; this  no 
doubt  was  Te  Heuheu. 

The  king  spoke  to  him  very  kindly,  and  asked  him  if  it  was 
true  that  his  men  had  killed  and  eaten  his  comrades ; Powers 
was  afraid  to  reply,  and  therefore  pretended  not  to  under- 
stand what  he  said ; he  then  sent  for  a little  slave  boy  who 
had  lived  a long  time  at  Taranaki  with  some  European,  and 
asked  him  all  the  particulars,  whether  any  provocation  had 
been  given  by  the  Europeans,  he  was  told  no ; he  then  called 
for  his  jpatiti,  hatchet,  one  of  his  wives  went  for  it ; Powers  said 
he  trembled,  and  felt  that  his  time  was  come  ; he  watched 
anxiously  the  woman  as  she  went  along  a narrow  alley  in 
the  pa,  until  she  disappeared ; the  king,  jumped  up,  and 
went  into  the  house,  but  soon  came  out  again,  clad  in 


ANDREW  POWERS, 


577 


his  best  mat,  with  one  round  his  loins,  and  a musket  in 
each  hand ; he  then  strode  into  the  midst  of  the  assembly, 
brandishing  his  muskets,  and  making  a very  animated  speech, 
expressing  his  grief  and  shame  that  suchfc  an  act  should 
have  been  committed  by  any  of  his  tribe ; he  said,  did  I 
send  you  to  the  sea  to  murder  and  eat  Europeans  who  had 
done  you  no  injury  ? How  can  I hold  up  my  face  when  I 
go  to  Maketu,  or  any  place  where  they  come ; hitherto  they 
have  regarded  me  as  their  friend,  but  now  they  will  say 
you  are  the  Chief  who  kills  and  eats  our  countrymen ; what 
folly  have  you  been  guilty  of  ? Who  is  it  that  supplies  you 
with  guns  ? brandishing  those  in  his  hands ; is  it  not  the 
Europeans  ? Will  they  do  so  now  they  know  what  you  have 
done  ? After  making  a very  long  harangue  in  this  strain, 
henarae  and  again  sat  down  by  Powers,  and  put  some  further 
questions  to  him,  which  he  pretended  not  to  comprehend ; 
he  therefore  soon  gave  over  talking  to  him  ; going  into  his 
house,  he  returned  with  three  figs  of  tobacco,  and  a short 
glazed  pipe,  with  a head  on  it,  which  he  gave  to  Powers, 
who  made  signs  that  he  did  not  smoke,  and  refused  to  take 
the  present ; the  king  said,  very  well,  if  you  do  not  smoke 
yourself,  take  the  gift  and  give  it  to  your  Chief. 

From  Taupo  they  went  to  Botorua,  where  Powers  was 
taken  fato  a man  employed  by  a trader  named  Scott  of  Tau- 
ranga,  as  his  agent  with  the  natives.  His  Chief  wanted  the 
man  to  redeem  him  ; he  wrote  to  Scott  to  ask  his  permission 
to  do  so,  who  replied,  that  he  had  better  return  to  the  West 
Coast,  from  whence  he  came ; but  if  he  wanted  him  to  redeem 
him,  he  must  sign  a bond  for  his  repayment,  and  agree  to 
the  price  of  the  goods  given  for  him. 

Powers  was  not  then  ransomed,  but  carried  on  to  Maketu ; 
there  he  found  a trader  named  Tapsall,  a Norwegian,  and  a 
countryman,  who,  without  a word,  immediately  gave  twenty- 
five  pounds  of  tobacco  for  his  redemption.  Tapsall  was  the 
first  European  who  was  regularly  married  to  a native  by  Mr. 
Marsden.  In  1839  I saw  him  with  his  wife  and  family,  which 
appeared  very  numerous,  encamped  under  his  boat,  which 
was  drawn  up  on  the  beach  at  Hekawa,  Hicks’  Bay,  where 
he  was  then  trading.  p p 


578 


JACKSONS  STORY. 


Andrew  Powers  lived  many  years  at  Wanganui ; he  was 
a fine  hale  old  man,  upwards  of  seventy.  This  account  he 
gave  me  in  September,  1850. 

There  is  still  another  story  connected  with  the  same  indi- 
vidual, which  is  illustrative  of  the  change  which  the  Gospel 
has  produced  in  New  Zealand,  in  the  treatment  the  same 
individual  experienced  at  two  different  periods  with  an  in- 
terval of  about  twenty  years  between.  In  fact,  in  Andrew 
Powers*  story  we  have  two  epochs  clearly  defined,  that  of 
heathenism  and  of  Christianity. 

Returning  from  Wellington  along  the  sea  shore  he  was 
taken  ill  and  laid  down  on  a sandhill,  unable  to  proceed  any 
further,  a native  who  was  travelling  that  way  saw  him,  and 
went  on  to  Otaki,  where  he  told  the  people  that  he  had  seen 
a 'pakeha  (European)  laid  on  the  shore  very  ill;  and  what 
did  you  do  to  him,  said  Tamihana,  the  . son  of  Te  Rauparaha 
the  Chief? — nothing  at  all;  I was  afraid  if  he  died  the  Euro- 
peans would  say  I had  killed  him ; well,  then,  said  Tami- 
hana, you  are  like  the  man  in  the  parable,  who  went  on  the 
other  side  of  the  way  ; he  then  went,  saddled  his  horses,  and 
he  and  his  wife  rode  off  to  see  the  poor  man,  they  found 
him  very  ill,  and  gave  him  some  refreshment  which  they  had 
brought  with  them ; they  then  got  bearers,  and  had  him 
carried  to  their  house,  where  he  stayed  many  days,  until  he 
was  quite  well.  The  poor  old  man,  when  he  related  this 
story,  said,  they  may  say  what  they  like,  but,  whether  a 
Maori  or  not,  Tamihana  te  Rauparaha  is  a gentleman. 


Jackson's  Story. 

The  following  story,  though  not  strictly  relating  to  New 
Zealand,  describes  the  curious  religious  customs  of  an  is- 
land further  to  the  north,  and  is  interesting.  A man  named 
Jackson,  who  was  out  whaling  in  the  Cape  packet,  related 
the  following  story  of  an  adventure  which  befel  him  at 
Alatana,  one  of  the  new  Hebrides.  A boat's  crew  was  sent 
on  shore  to  cut  firewood,  he  was  one  of  the  party,  but 


jackson's  story. 


579 


having  drank  too  much,  he  went  into  the  bush,  laid  down 
amongst  the  trees  and  fell  asleep,,  and  so  soundly,  that  when 
his  companions  called  him  he  did  not  awake,  neither  could 
they  find  him : having  called  and  searched  for  some  time, 
they  left  and  returned  to  the  ship. 

When  he  awoke,  he  got  up  and  searched  for  the  boat,  but 
found  to  his  dismay  it  had  gone,  he  looked  about,  and  saw 
two  natives  on  a small  island,  only  separated  from  the  one  he 
was  on  by  a deep  narrow  channel;  he  fled  and  concealed 
himself.  Afterwards  four  men  landed  from  a canoe  on  his 
island ; they  sat  down  with  their  backs  turned  towards  him ; 
he  approached  without  noise,  crawling  on  his  hands  and  knees : 
when  he  reached  them,  which  he  did  unseen,  he  stood  up. 
The  natives  were  so  much  alarmed  at  the  sudden  apparition 
of  a white  man,  that  they  fell  down  flat  on  the  ground,  as 
though  they  were  dead ; afterwards  they  arose,  and  sang  a 
song  to  him,  most  probably  it  was  a karakia,  as  they  would 
take  him  for  a god,  for  most  black  tribes  think  the  gods  and 
spirits  of  ancestors  are  white. 

After  some  time,  they  beckoned  him  to  follow  them,  which 
he  did ; he  was  led  inland  about  ten  miles ; as  they  went, 
they  crossed  a brook ; he  was  going  to  drink,  when  they 
pulled  him  back,  fearing,  perhaps,  if  he  did  so,  that  the 
water  would  be  tapu,  and  they  could  not  afterwards  drink 
of  it  without  dying ; but  one  of  them  offered  him  some 
urine  in  a clam  shell  to  drink  ; The  New  Zealand  natives 
think  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  fteinga  or  Hades  feed  on 
human  excrement  and  drink  urine,  and  this  appears  to  have 
a reference  to  a similar  idea ; they  might  further  suppose,  if 
permitted  to  partake  of  earthly  food,  he  would  not  be  able  to 
return  to  Purutu,  or  Paradise,  as  the  Tonga  natives  report  was 
the  case  with  their  first  ancestors.  After  passing  through 
beautiful  cultivations,  bordered  with  fences  of  reed,  and 
intersected  by  narrow  roads,  they  came  to  a village ; he  was 
taken  to  a large  court  surrounded  with  cocoa-nut  trees,  and 
placed  by  the  side  of  a Chief,  whose  wife  was  sitting  on  the 
other  side  of  him. 

They  then  offered  him  a raw  taro,  which  he  refused,  and 

p p 2 


580 


JACKSONS  STORY. 


afterwards  beat  up  another  with  the  scrapings  of  some  red 
root,  which  they  wrapped  np  in  a leaf  and  placed  on  the  fire, 
and  when  cooked  gave  to  him ; he  fancied  it  was  poison,  and 
privately  conveyed  it  into  his  bosom,  pretending  he  had  eaten 
it ; he  gave  his  cap  to  one  of  the  Chiefs,  who  had  before  asked 
for  it,  and  several  other  things  also,  which  they  fancied ; they 
then  ate  a cocoa-nut,  and  gave  him  the  shell,  filled  with 
urine ; afterwards,  about  twenty  natives  came,  each  bring- 
ing a load  of  wood,  all  cut  of  equal  length,  which  they  piled 
up  like  a chimney,  and  made  a sign  for  him  to  sit  on  a stone 
flag  in  front  of  the  fire,  and  then  applied  a light  to  the  pile, 
which  flamed  up  almost  instantaneously  and  most  beautifully, 
blazing  out  on  all  sides ; his  seat  became  very  hot,  but  he 
maintained  his  post  on  the  stone  until  the  whole  was  con- 
sumed ; then  about  fifty  girls  came  and  were  ranged  around 
him,  and  signs  were  made  for  him  to  select  one  of  them,  this 
he  also  declined  doing. 

A Chief,  having  three  tail  feathers  of  the  cock  stuck  in  his 
hair,  came  and  turned  his  back  to  Jackson,  this  act  termi- 
nated their  curious  ceremonies ; suddenly  all  disappeared, 
and  the  Chief  beckoned  him  to  enter  his  house ; on  one 
side  there  was  a neat  bed,  made  of  soft  mats  ; the  Chief  laid 
himself  upon  it,  and  pointed  to  the  damp  sand,  intimating 
that  was  to  be  his  resting-place.  Two  natives  came  in,  one 
laid  on  either  side  of  him,  placing  his  spear  by  Jackson's 
side,  two  others  laid  down  with  their  heads  touching  his,  and 
two  more  by  his  feet,  whilst  another  two  threw  themselves 
down  near  the  door. 

When  the  cock  crew,  they  arose  one  by  one,  and  went 
out.  He  felt  extremely  hungry,  and  determined  to  obtain, 
if  possible,  some  of  the  cocoa-nuts  from  the  trees  which  grew 
in  the  Chief's  court-yard,  he  therefore  gently  got  up,  went 
out,  and  succeeded  in  climbing  one  of  the  trees,  from  which 
he  took  a nut;  he  had  just  managed  to  scratch  a hole  in  it 
with  his  fingers,  when  he  was  perceived,  and  dragged  back 
again.  In  the  morning  he  was  escorted  back  to  the  coast, 
and  then  there  was  a fight  about  him,  some  appearing  to 
wish  him  to  be  given  up,  others  opposing ; several  lives  were 
lost,  but  a boat  came  off,  and  he  was  rescued. 


JACKSON'S  STORY. 


581 


It  was  customary  in  some  parts  of  New  Zealand  to  place  a 
raw  taro  in  the  hand  of  a corpse  before  they  uttered  an  in- 
cantation. This  was  called  he  wakae'ke,  to  enable  the  spirit 
to  ascend  to  heaven.  It  appears  evident  that  he  was  viewed 
as  a spirit  or  god,  and  treated  as  one,  also  that  their  religion 
closely  resembled  that  of  New  Zealand. 


A MONUMENT  ERECTED  AT  WANGANUI  BY  THE  PROVINCE  OF  WELLINGTON,  TO  THE 
MEMORY  OF  THE  LOYAL  NATIVES  WHO  FELL  AT  MOUTOA. 


APERHAMA  RUKE,  HEAD  TEACHER  OF  WANGANUI. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 

Of  all  the  persons  connected  with  the  civilization  of  New 
Zealand,  no  one  stands  higher  than  Samnel  Marsden.  Cook 
took  possession  of  the  country  in  the  name  of  his  Sovereign, 
but  it  was  Marsden  who  first  unfurled  the  banner  of  the 
Prince  of  Peace,  and  claimed  those  fair  realms,  then  laid  in 
heathen  darkness,  on  behalf  of  the  King  of  kings  ; it  was  he 
who  first  introduced  their  savage  inhabitants  to  Christian 
philanthropy,  enlisted  the  sympathy  of  the  Church  in  their 
behalf,  and  having  obtained  aid,  brought  it  himself,  and  was 
the  first  to  proclaim  the  message  of  mercy  on  their  shores ; 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


583 


lie  was  tlie  honored  instrument  who  laid  the  first  stone  of  the 
New  Zealand  Churchy  and  thus  commenced  a work  which 
has  increased  in  magnitude  with  increasing  years,  and  added 
many  to  the  fold  of  Christ.* 

The  venerated  name  of  Marsden,  so  intimately  connected 
with  the  history  of  New  Zealand  and  its  emancipation  from 
that  savage  state  in  which  it  formerly  laid,  demands  further 
mention  : — 

Mr.  Marsden  was  born  at  a village  called  Horseforth, 
between  Bradford  and  Leeds,  in  the  West  Biding  of  York- 
shire, where  many  of  his  relatives  still  reside  ; f he  was 
originally  a blacksmith,  f which  far  from  being  derogatory, 
greatly  redounds  to  his  credit,  that  by  his  own  inherent 
energy  of  character,  he  should  have  raised  himself  from  the 
multitude  of  the  unknown,  and  obtained  a name  far  more 
honorable,  widely  extended,  and  likely  to  be  perpetuated, 
than  that  of  many  who,  though  distinguished  by  wealth  and 
ancestry,  are  never  heard  of  beyond  their  own  circles,  and 
whose  names  will  be  as  totally  unknown  to  future  ages,  as 
those  of  the  mass  from  which  the  good  man  arose,  who  is 
still  revered,  and  will  continue  to  be  so  in  the  distant  land 
he  labored,  and  by  the  Church  in  general  to  which  he 

* There  is  every  reason  to  believe,  that  it  was  the  last  sermon  preached  by 
Mr.  Marsden,  at  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight,  (where  he  touched  before  he  sailed  for 
Australia,)  which  was  the  means  blessed  to  the  conversion  of  the  dairyman’s 
daughter. 

f 1769,  Dec.  24th — Samuel,  son  of  John  Marsden,  blacksmith,  was  baptized 
in  the  Chapel  of  Horsforth,  and  Registered  in  the  Parish  Church  of  Guiseley, 
York. 

X It  appears  not  improbable  that  the  founder  of  the  noble  family  of  Ferrars 
was  once  either  a member  of  the  same  fraternity,  or  of  the  kindred  one  of 
Farriers,  and  on  that  account  assumed  the  horse  shoe  for  his  heraldic  bearing, 
in  memory  of  which  the  King  granted  him  the  privilege  of  demanding  the  horse 
shoes  of  every  peer  of  the  realm  who  passed  by  his  castle  at  Oakham,  a custom 
which  is  yet  observed  ; the  old  baronial  hall,  the  only  portion  still  entire  is 
filled  with  mementos  of  it,  several  hundred  horse  shoes  of  every  dimension  are 
nailed  on  its  walls,  from  that  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  in  size  somewhat  less  than  a 
cart  wheel,  to  one  of  Queen  Victoria,  which  is  gilt  and  also  of  fair  proportions. 
The  town  has  also  assumed  the  horse  shoe  for  its  armorial  bearing,  and  seems  to 
patronize  the  horse  chesnut  tree,  from  its  having,  I suppose,  the  marks  of  the 
right  number  of  nails  in  the  horse  shoe  on  the  scars  made  by  the  leaves  on  its 
branches. 


584 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


belonged.*  His  mind  was  early  fixed  on  the  ministry,  be 
used  every  opportunity  of  preparing  bimself  for  it.  An 
anecdote  is  related  of  him,  that  even  whilst  employed  at  bis 
trade,  and  blowing  tbe  bellows  with  one  band,  with  a bit  of 
chalk  in  tbe  other,  be  wrote  out  tbe  declensions  on  tbe  fire- 
board  of  bis  forge.  Mr.  Stone,  f the  clergyman  of  tbe  parish, 
perceiving  bis  serious  turn  of  mind,  kindly  took  him  to  live 
with  him,  and  bad  him  brought  up  for  tbe  ministry. 

After  the  independence  of  our  North  American  colonies, 
it  became  necessary  to  found  a fresh  penal  settlement, 
and  New  South  Wales  was  selected.  When  tbe  first  fleet 
was  on  tbe  point  of  sailing  to  commence  tbe  colony,  tbe 
Minister  of  tbe  day  was  waited  upon  by  two  philanthropic 
men,  one  of  whom  was  Wilberforce,  and  the  other  I believe 
Clarkson,  who  pointed  out  tbe  duty  of  sending  tbe  means 
of  grace  also ; be  laughed  at  tbe  idea  of  any  benefit  being 
derived  by  such  a set  of  abandoned  wretches,  and  enquired 
what  clergyman  would  be  persuaded  .to  take  such  a duty 
upon  him  ; they  asked,  in  reply,  whether  be  would  furnish 
means,  if  they  could  provide  tbe  man,  this  be  promised 
to  do  ; they  lost  no  time  in  introducing  tbe  Rev.  R.  John- 
son, a worthy  good  man,  but  quite  unequal  to  tbe  work 
of  stemming  tbe  torrent  of  iniquity  which  there  deluged 
society ; and  when  that  gentleman,  discouraged  by  tbe  fearful 
state  of  depravity  which  prevailed  in  tbe  infant  colony,  after 
a brief  sojourn  there,  returned,  having  first  published  a 
faithful  and  solemn  address  to  those  he  had  so  vainly  labored 
amongst,  the  Minister  exultingly  said,  did  I not  tell  you  how 
it  would  be  ? they,  however,  demanded  that  another  trial 
should  be  made,  which  being  assented  to,  Mr.  Marsden  was 
next  selected ; through  the  influence  of  his  kind  friend  Mr. 
Stone,  and  others,  he  had  been  sent  by  the  Elland  Society 
to  St.  John^s  College,  Cambridge,  as  a sizar,  and  was  there 


* Mr.  Marsden’s  family  ought  to  assume  the  horse  shoe  with  the  cross 
springing  from  it,  as  their  heraldic  bearing,  and  the  shield  of  the  newly-created 
Australian  bishoprick  over  which  his  grandson  presides,  should  have  it  quar- 
tered with  the  southern  cross, 
t Incumbent  of  Guiseley,  in  the  parish  of  Rawden, 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


585 


when  selected  for  the  penal  colony,  he  did  not  stay  to  take 
his  degree,  but  was  at  once  ordained  by  the  Archbishop  of 
York,  and  sent  ont ; his  commission  was  dated  January  1st 
1793.  Possessing  a great  degree  of  firmness  and  determina- 
tion, combined  with  plain  good  sense,  and  fervent  piety,  he 
was  admirably  fitted  for  the  arduous  duty  he  had  accepted, 
to  strangers,  his  looks  and  manners  were  not  prepossessing, 
having  a degree  of  sternness  in  his  countenance;  but  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  his  position  doubtless  impressed  his 
unflinching  firmness  on  his  features. 

Few  can  form  a just  idea  of  the  fearful  state  of  depravity 
which  prevailed  amongst  all  ranks  in  the  early  days  of  the 
colony.  Two  instances  may  here  be  appropriately  given,  as 
showing  the  necessity  of  severe  firmness  in  the  minister,  and 
as  a key  to  the  cause  of  the  bitter  enmity  he  experienced  from 
those  in  power.  At  the  commencement  of  the  colony,  the 
sale  of  all  spirits  was  monopolized  by  the  officers,  and  it 
was  the  endeavouring  to  do  away  with  this  practice,  that 
afterwards  caused  the  deposition  of  Governor  Bligh;  when 
vessels  with  female  convicts  arrived,  they  likewise  took  in 
turns  the  selection  of  the  fairest  as  companions,*  and  not 
only  was  this  generally  done,  but  winked  at  by  the  highest 
authorities,  and  these  females  as  well  as  their  partners  were 
actually  admitted  to  Government  House ; Mr.  Marsden  very 
properly  refused  to  sit  at  table  with  them,  or  sanction  their 
conduct  by  his  presence,  thus,  through  decliniug  invita- 
tions on  such  occasions,  and  plainly  stating  his  reason,  the 
bitter  hostility  of  the  Governor  and  his  officers  was  excited 
against  him  ; every  effort  was  made  to  effect  his  ruin  ; public 
records  were  falsified, f and  such  representations  sent  home, 
as  called  for  a searching  inquiry  into  the  chaplain's  conduct, 
the  result  of  which  was,  that  the  Governor  received  a com- 

* One  individual  thus  went  on  board  and  took  a fancy  to  a young  woman, 
who  was  coming  out  to  join  her  husband,  a convict ; he  went  to  him,  and  bought 
his  wife  of  him  for  a chest  of  tea  and  some  tobacco  ; he  lived  with  her  many 
years,  and  left  a large  family  by  her. 

t See  published  account  of  Inquiry  relative  to  the  Rev.  S.  Marsden' s having 
ordered  Convicts  to  be  flogged . 


586  SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 

mand  to  make  known  to  the  reverend  gentleman,  not  only 
tke  fact  of  his  being  honorably  acquitted,  but  that  the  home 
Government,  in  approval  of  his  conduct,  had  added  £100 
a-year  to  his  salary,  and  ordered  a suitable  residence  to  be 
erected  for  him.  Another  anecdote  will  also  show  the  early 
state  of  the  colony,  Mr.  Marsden  had  repeatedly  complained 
to  the  Governor  of  the  dangerous  state  the  place  was  in 
where  they  assembled  for  divine  worship ; for  some  time  no 
notice  was  taken  of  his  representations,  at  last  one  Sabbath 
in  the  midst  of  the  service,  a master  mason  with  a number  of 
convict  assistants  bearing  ladders  tools  and  hods  of  mortar, 
came  with  great  clatter  and  noise  into  the  midst  of  the  church, 
Mr.  Marsden  demanded  the  cause  of  the  interruption,  the  man 
told  him  that  the  Governor  said,  the  building  was  in  such  a 
dangerous  state,  that  they  were  to  lose  no  time,  but  go 
immediately  and  commence  the  repairs;  he  told  them,  at 
any  rate,  to  stay  until  the  service  was  over ; they  said,  they 
dare  not,  the  commands  being  imperative ; then  said  he  to 
his  congregation  as  we  cannot  worship  God  here,  let  us  go 
where  we  can ; he  immediately  arose,  still  habited  in  his 
surplice,  and  followed  by  his  congregation,  went  to  the 
Court-house,  and  there  concluded  the  service. 

Such  was  the  estimation  in  which  he  was  held  by  the  home 
Government,  that  Governor  Macquarie  was  ordered  to  under- 
take no  measure  of  importance,  without  first  consulting  the 
senior  Chaplain,  and  one  of  the  first  measures  of  that  gen- 
tleman was  pressing  those  who  had  been  living  in  a state  of 
concubinage  to  marry,  many  of  them  having  large  families, 
making  their  visits  at  Government  House  contingent  on  their 
doing  so,  this  had  the  desired  effect,  and  some  of  the  chief 
families  in  the  colonies  have  thus  originated. 

On  Mr.  Marsden*  s arrival,  he  found  Governor  Phillip  had 
left,  after  having  founded  the  colony,  and  Governor  Grose 
then  occupying  his  post,  who  was  succeeded  in  1795  by 
Captain  Hunter,  who,  in  1800,  was  replaced  by  Captain 
King.  It  was  this  Governor  who  obtained  two  New  Zealand 
natives,  Toki  and  Huru,  from  Doubtless  Bay,  near  the  North 
Cape,  as  teachers,  to  show  the  prisoners  at  Norfolk  Island 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


587 


the  way  of  working  flax,  which  is  indigenous  there,  as  well  as 
in  New  Zealand ; the  Governor  landed  in  that  Bay,  and  gave 
many  valuable  presents  to  the  natives,  he  introduced  the  pig 
in  the  north,  which  they  had  not  previously  seen,  he  gave  them 
maize  and  potatoes,  so  that  when  those  natives  returned  with 
all  their  presents,  they  raised  such  a favorable  opinion  of  the 
Europeans,  that  the  memory  of  Captain  King  is  preserved 
even  to  this  day.  But  a more  important  result  of  this  visit 
of  Toki  and  Huru  to  Norfolk  Island,  was  their  becoming 
acquainted  with  Mr.  Marsden ; so  much  was  he  struck  with 
their  intelligence  and  manners,  that  from  that  time  he 
determined  to  use  his  best  efforts  to  raise  their  race  from  its 
then  debased  state.  In  1807,  he  accompanied  Governor 
King  to  England,  and  it  was  then  that  he  brought  New 
Zealand  to  the  notice  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society  ; his 
application  was  favorably  received,  and  when  he  returned, 
in  1810,  he  took  Messrs.  Hall  and  King  with*  him  as  lay 
Missionaries ; they  were  afterwards  joined  by  Mr.  Kendal 
and  his  family,  the  party,  however,  was  hindered  from  pro- 
ceeding to  its  destination  for  several  years,  on  account  of  the 
sad  massacre  of  the  Boyd , which  had  cast  a great  damp  on 
the  colony,  as  many  of  the  children  of  the  principal  people 
were  in  it,  on  their  way  to  England  for  education ; it  is  one 
of  the  many  sad  warnings  given,  to  treat  natives  with  kind- 
ness, however  low  they  may  be  considered  in  the  scale  of 
civilization ; neglecting  this  has  caused  the  destruction  of 
many,  and  too  frequently  the  innocent  have  suffered  for  the 
guilty ; several  of  the  principal  Chiefs,  however,  in  the  mean- 
time, visited  the  colony,  and  found  a home  at  Mr.  Marsden^s 
house. 

In  1814,  he  purchased  the  brig  Active , a vessel  of  one 
hundred  tons,  and  November  19th  went  on  board  on  his 
first  visit  to  New  Zealand,  to  locate  the  laborers  he  had 
procured  for  this  new  mission  field;  on  the  15th  December 
they  sighted  the  Three  Kings,  and  on  the  16th  opened  a 
friendly  communication  with  the  natives  of  the  North  Cape. 
He  was  accompanied  by  Mr.  Nicholas,  who  afterwards  pub- 
lished an  account  of  the  voyage,  and  by  Messrs.  King,  Kendal, 


588 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


and  Hall,  with  their  wives  and  five  children,  two  sawyers,  and 
a smith ; a horse,  a bull,  two  cows,  a few  sheep,  and  poultry 
of  different  kinds,  were  also  taken  with  them  ; they  first 
anchored  in  Matouri  Bay,  about  twenty  miles  to  the  north 
of  the  Bay  of  Islands. 

Mr.  Marsden  landed  with  his  party  at  Waiawa,  but  he  and 
Mr.  Nicholas  only  stayed  on  shore  for  the  night ; there  he 
met  Tara,  better  known  by  the  name  George,  the  Chief  who 
cut  off  the  Boyd , and  he  slept  by  his  side,  in  full  confidence 
that  he  might  do  so  with  safety  ; this  fearless  conduct  shows 
his  natural  strength  of  mind  most  forcibly,  when  he  could 
thus,  without  protection,  entrust  his  life  the  very  first  night 
he  passed  on  shore  with  that  savage  and  cannibal  chieftain; 
it  is  interesting  to  know,  that  the  first  work  of  this  servant  of 
Him  who  is  the  Prince  of  Peace,  was  to  make  peace  between 
the  Bay  of  Islands  and  Wangaroa  natives,  and  to  put  an  end 
to  the  deadly  feud  which  had  so  long  existed  between  them ; 
thus  the  foundation  of  the  Gospel  in  New  Zealand  was  laid  in 
peace — a happy  omen  for  its  future  success.  The  description 
which  Mr.  Marsden  himself  gave  of  that  memorable  night,  is 
so  graphic,  that  it  must  be  given  in  his  own  words  : — “ As 
the  evening  advanced,  the  people  began  to  retire  to  rest  in 
different  groups  ; about  eleven  o'clock,  Mr.  Nicholas  and  I 
wrapped  ourselves  up  in  our  great  coats,  and  prepared  for 
rest  also.  George  directed  me  to  lie  by  his  side ; his  wife 
and  child  lay  on  the  right  hand,  and  Mr.  Nicholas  close  by, 
the  night  was  clear,  the  stars  shone  bright,  and  the  sea  in 
our  front  was  smooth ; around  us  were  numerous  spears, 
stuck  upright  in  the  ground,  and  groups  of  natives  lying  in 
all  directions,  like  a flock  of  sheep  upon  the  grass,  as  there 
were  neither  tents  nor  huts  to  cover  them ; I viewed  our 
present  situation  with  sensations  and  feelings  that  I cannot 
express — surrounded  by  cannibals,  who  had  massacred  and 
devoured  our  countrymen,  I wondered  much  at  the  mysteries 
of  Providence,  and  how  these  things  could  be  ! never  did  I 
behold  the  blessed  advantage  of  civilization  in  a more  grateful 
light  than  now ; I did  not  sleep  much  during  the  night, 
my  mind  was  too  seriously  occupied  by  the  present  scene. 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


589 


and  the  new  and  strange  ideas  which  it  naturally  excited. 
About  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I rose  and  walked 
about  the  camp,  surveying  the  different  groups  of  natives  ; 
some  of  them  put  out  their  heads  from  under  the  top  of  their 
Jcalcahus  (a  rough  shaggy  mat,  which  is  like  a bee  hive),  and 
spoke  to  me ; when  the  morning  light  returned,  we  beheld 
men,  women,  and  children  asleep  in  all  directions,  like  the 
beasts  of  the  field."  His  confidence  and  efforts  to  obtain 
peace  were  rewarded ; in  the  morning  Ruatara,  Hongi,  and 
Korokoro  came  and  hungied , i.e.,  rubbed  noses,  the  Maori 
way  of  salutation,  with  the  Wangaroa  Chief,  in  token  of 
future  peace  and  amity. 

From  Matouri,  they  went  to  the  Bay  of  Islands,  near  the 
entrance  of  which  Ruatara  lived,  at  a place  called  Rangihu, 
and  there  the  first  missionary  station  was  placed,  and  there 
also  the  first  Sabbath  was  kept,  and  that  day  was  indeed  a 
high  day,  being  Christmas- day,  1814.  Ruatara  appears 
to  have  done  everything  in  his  power  to  do  honor  to  the 
occasion  : he  enclosed  about  half-an-acre  of  land  with  a fence, 
and  hoisted  the  British  flag,  which,  though  not  bearing  the 
dove  as  the  emblem  of  peace  on  its  waving  folds,  has  hitherto 
floated  as  the  defender  of  those  who  bore  the  message  of 
peace,  and  imparted  confidence,  that  however  remote  the 
spot  wherever  it  was  hoisted,  they  were  safe. 

Mr.  Marsden  remarked,  “ On  Sunday  morning,  when  I 
was  on  deck,  I saw  the  English  flag  flying,  which  was  a 
pleasing  sight  in  Hew  Zealand.  I considered  it  was  the 
signal  and  dawn  of  civilization,  liberty,  and  religion,  in  that 
dark  and  benighted  land,  I never  viewed  the  British  colors 
with  more  gratification,  and  flattered  myself  they  would 
never  be  removed  till  the  natives  of  the  island  enjoyed  the 
happiness  of  British  subjects."  Thesp  words  were  prophetic. 
Ruatara  passed  the  remainder  of  the  day  in  preparing  for  the 
Sabbath  : he  erected  a pulpit  and  reading-desk  in  the  centre 
of  the  enclosed  space ; these  he  made  out  of  an  old  canoe, 
and  covered  with  cloth,  given  him  in  Sydney,  he  formed 
seats  in  a similar  way  for  the  European  portion  of  the  con- 
gregation ; then,  having  made  all  his  arrangements  he  and 


590 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


his  two  companions,  dressed  in  regimentals  given  them  by 
the  Governor,  with  swords  by  their  sides,  and  switches  in 
their  hands,  marshalled  their  people  on  either  side  of  Mr. 
Mars  den,  who  had  the  honor  of  there  first  preaching  the 
Gospel,  and  the  lesson  for  the  day  furnished  a most  appro- 
priate text — tc  Behold,  I bring  you  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy.”  (Luke  ii.  10).  He  told  Ruatara  that  he  must  interpret 
the  sermon  to  his  people ; he  replied,  “ by  and  bye,  not 
understand  it  yet”;  thus  was  commenced  the  preaching  of 
that  Word  which,  after  the  lapse  of  little  more  than  a quar- 
ter of  a century,  was  to  make  such  a wonderful  change 
in  the  land,  and,  like  the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  was  to 
grow  and  become  a great  tree,  so  that  the  fowls  of  the  air 
might  lodge  in  its  branches.  Various  were  the  difficulties  it 
had  to  contend  with — times  of  prosperity  and  adversity ; it 
passed  through  every  phase,  overcame  every  obstacle,  found 
its  way  into  the  hearts  of  the  people,  opened  their  eyes  to 
discern  the  fallacies  and  enormities  they  had  been  guilty 
of,  and  constrained  them  to  abandon  them. 

What  caste  is  in  India,  the  tapu  was  in  New  Zealand ; it 
held  unlimited  sway  over  the  mind,  and  compelled  obedience 
to  its  requirements  ; but  it  could  not  exist  with  Christianity, 
that  word  declares;  “No  man  can  serve  two  masters;”  no 
sooner  had  the  Gospel  obtained  root  in  the  land,  than  the 
power  of  the  tapu  was  destroyed  ; the  native  mind  became 
as  completely  emancipated  from  its  thraldom  as  if  it  never 
had  existed. 

Ruatara  soon  after  died  at  Rangihu,  to  Mr.  Marsdem’s 
great  sorrow ; he  regarded  his  removal  as  a most  mysterious 
act  of  Providence,  as  he  appeared  to  be  the  instrument  raised 
up  for  enabling  him  to  introduce  the  Gospel ; but  the  Lord 
clearly  pointed  out  by  his  death,  that  it  was  not  on  an  arm 
of  flesh  he  was  to  lean,  but  on  that  Word  which  said,  “I 
will  be  exalted  amongst  the  heathen.”  Ruatara  charged 
his  children  and  people,  on  his  death-bed,  to  protect  the 
Missionaries,  and  made  each  of  them  promise  to  be  their 
defenders ; the  guardians  of  his  children  took  this  duty  upon 
themselves,  and  answered,  “We  will  protect  our  teachers.” 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


591 


Mr.  King,  one  of  the  original  pioneers  left  by  Mr.  Marsden, 
died  in  1854,  having  thus  been  nearly  forty  years  at  his  post. 
What  changes  did  that  good  old  man  see ; what  difficulties 
had  he  had  to  contend  with  ! he  removed  from  Rangihu  about 
a mile  further  up  the  bay,  to  Tepuna,  a more  suitable  locality, 
and  there  this  faithful  laborer  in  the  Lord's  vineyard  lived 
and  died. 

On  the  Monday  morning,  he  landed  the  teachers, — the 
natives  had  selected  a spot,  and  on  this  they  were  located, 
Mr.  Marsden,  however,  remained  with  them  until  the  end  of 
February,  to  see  them  properly  settled,  and  then  returned  to 
Sydney.  It  is  not  my  intention  to  dwell  on  Mr.  Marsden' s 
ministry  in  New  South  Wales,  further  than  in  his  connection 
with  the  New  Zealand  Mission ; otherwise  it  would  enlarge 
this  sketch  beyond  its  proper  limits  ; but  even  when  at  home. 
New  Zealand  was  not  forgotten.  An  important  service  was 
rendered  to  the  cause  by  his  establishing  an  industrial  school 
for  the  Maori ; in  the  interval  between  his  first  and  second 
visit,  he  had  as  many  as  twenty-four  natives  under  his  care, 
and  he  reported  that  they  had  all  conducted  themselves  to 
his  entire  satisfaction. 

It  is  pleasing  to  see  how  firm  this  good  man's  faith  was 
that  the  time  had  come,  when  heathen  darkness  was  to  give 
way  to  Christian  light.  “ I believe,"  said  he,  “ that  the  time 
is  now  come  for  these  nations  to  be  called  into  the  outward 
church  at  least,  the  way  is  clear.  Divine  goodness  will  pro- 
vide the  means  for  their  instruction.  I admit  that  many 
difficulties  will  be  met  with  on  all  untried  ground  ; and  that 
the  wisest  men  will  sometimes  mistake  the  right  way  of 
accomplishing  their  objects,  with  respect  to  a nation  which 
has  had  no  intercourse  with  the  civilized  world ; yet  these 
difficulties  will  be  overcome,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  by 
constant  perseverance ; and  I have  no  doubt  but  this  will  be 
the  case  in  the  present  instance  with  regard  to  New  Zealand. 
Time  will  make  this  matter  more  easy ; the  work  is  now  be- 
gun— the  foundation  is  laid — and  I hope  we  shall  soon  see 
the  structure  arise." 

On  the  26th  July,  1819,  Mr.  Marsden  again  sailed  for  New 


592 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


Zealand  ; he  took  with  him  several  fresh  hands  to  strengthen 
the  work  there ; and  located  them  at  the  Keri  Keri ; after 
settling  the  Mission  to  the  best  of  his  power,  he  returned  to 
Sydney. 

At  the  request  of  the  Governor,  he  went  again  to  New 
Zealand,  to  the  Thames,  in  H.  M.  ship  Coromandel , Feb- 
ruary 20th,  1820,  only  a few  months  after  his  return  ; he 
there  landed,  and  under  the  guidance  of  a Chief,  Tamorangi, 
he  took  what  was  then  a most  wonderful  journey  overland  to 
the  Bay  of  Islands  ; in  several  parts  they  were  at  open  war, 
and  the  Chief,  who  afterwards  became  a believer,  often  ex- 
pressed his  astonishment  that  he  had  ever  dared  to  venture 
upon  it;  when  Mr.  Marsden  reached  the  Keri  Keri,  his  clothes 
were  in  rags,  covered  with  mud  and  red  ochre,  from  his 
continual  contact  with  the  natives,  who  were  then  constantly 
smeared  all  over  with  it  and  shark'*  s oil,  and  with  an  old 
dirty  nightcap  on  his  head,  he  made  his  appearance  before 
the  astonished  Missionaries;  he  arrived  most  opportunely, 
for  they  were  on  the  point  of  breaking  up  the  Mission,  and 
leaving  in  the  Dromedary , (Captain  Skinner,)  which  was 
then  in  the  bay;  disheartened  by  the  opposition  of  the 
natives,  and  the  horrid  scenes  they  witnessed,  they  despaired 
of  success ; when  suddenly  the  father  of  the  Mission  stood 
before  the  affrighted  laborers ; it  was  only  a few  months 
before,  that  he  had  taken  leave  of  them  on  his  way  back 
to  Sydney ; we  can  thus  only  regard  the  request  of  Govern- 
ment for  him  to  go  in  the  Coromandel  as  an  over-ruling  act 
of  Providence.  Mr.  Marsden  alternately  reasoned  with  and 
rebuked  the  Missionaries,  telling  them,  that  though  the  way 
mighty  then  appear  dark,  his  faith  assured  him  there  would 
never  be  wanting  a seed  to  serve  God  in  that  land ; though 
they  all  might  abandon  it,  the  work  would  still  go  on ; his 
firmness  strengthened  their  faith,  and  increased  their  courage 
— they  resolved  to  stay — they  stood  their  ground  : the  Lord 
soon  raised  up  friends  ; the  dark  clouds  dispersed,  and  the 
Mission  |began  to  gain  a firmer  hold  upon  the  native  mind.* 
The  chief  mistake  Mr.  Marsden  committed,  in  laying  the 

* These  particulars  I received  from  old  Mr.  King. 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


593 


foundation  of  the  Mission,  was  in  commencing  it  as  a lay 
establishment,  rather  for  secular  than  spiritual  instruction, 
laboring  under  the  common  mistake  then  prevalent,  that  it 
was  useless  to  attempt  inculcating  the  sublime  truths  of 
Christianity  upon  the  savage  mind,  before  it  had  been  pre- 
pared by  civilization  for  its  reception ; and  thus  it  is  not 
surprising  that  no  great  impression  was  made,  until  the 
arrival  of  ordained  Missionaries,  who  commenced  with  purely 
spiritual  instruction  : and  it  was  very  remarkable,  that  soon 
after  their  arrival  the  work  was  blessed,  and  became  signally 
visible.  The  first  convert,  an  old  Chief,  was  made  in  1 825, 
it  was  upon  his  long-benighted  mind  that  the  true  light  first 
beamed  to  cheer  his  closing  days,  and  as  a bright  lamp  to 
guide  him  through  the  valley  and  shadow  of  death  into  the 
realms  of  eternal  life  and  light ; he  was  baptized  by  the  name 
of  Christian  Eangi. 

Mr.  Marsden  left  Sydney  on  his  fourth  visit  to  New  Zealand . 
July  23rd  1823,  in  the  Brompton  ; he  found  the  Mission 
prospering,  schools  established,  his  opinion  of  the  importance 
of  which  is  seen  in  his  report : the  true  foundation  must  be 
laid  in  the  education  of  the  rising  generation  ; it  was  during 
this  visit  that  the  Paihia  station  was  formed,  and  the  two 
Mr.  Williams  located  there ; his  original  intention  was  to 
have  placed  them  at  Wangaroa,  but  the  Wesleyans  having 
gone  there,  he  very  properly  selected  another  spot ; the 
Brom'ptoUy  in  which  he  was  to  return,  was  unfortunately 
wrecked  by  missing  stays,  and  going  on  the  reef,  which  now 
bears  its  name ; it  sailed  on  the  Sabbath,  which  both  sur- 
prised and  alarmed  several  Chiefs,  who  were  on  board ; they 
said,  you  have  taught  us  not  to  sail  our  canoes  on  the  sacred 
day,  your  God  has  ordered  the  ship  to  rest,  then  let  it  rest, 
if  your  God  be  like  the  New  Zealand  god,  he  will  kill  the 
ship  ; if  your  ship  should  die,  you  must  not  blame  our  god 
for  killing  it.  Alas,  how  often  have  we  put  stumbling-blocks 
in  the  way  of  the  heathen,  did  not  God  vindicate  his  violated 
law  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen,  by  the  wreck  of  the  Brompton 

* The  brig  Mercury  was  all  but  taken  in  Wangaroa  Harbour  in  1825,  for 
trading  on  the  Sabbath.  Tepuhi  inquired  of  the  Missionaries,  Do  you  know 

Q Q 


594 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


One  of  the  passengers,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Leigh,  a W esleyan  Mis- 
sionary, states  : “ The  shipwreck  we  have  experienced  will,  I 
have  no  doubt,  prove  favorable  to  the  reputation  of  the  New 
Zealanders,  for  several  days  we  were  in  their  power,  and 
they  might  have  taken  all  that  we  had  with  the  greatest  ease  ; 
but,  instead  of  oppressing  and  robbing  us,  they  actually 
sympathized  with  us  in  all  our  trials  and  afflictions.  Mr. 
Marsden,  myself,  and  Mrs.  Leigh  were  at  a native  village 
for  several  days  and  nights,  without  any  food  but  what  the 
natives  brought  us  : what  they  had  they  gave  us  willingly, 
and  said,  ‘ Poor  creatures,  you  have  nothing  to  eat,  and  you 
are  not  accustomed  to  our  kind  of  food' ; I shall  never  forget 
the  sympathy  and  kindness  of  these  poor  heathens."  What 
a lesson  is  this  for  the  wreckers  who  still  disgrace  the  shores 
of  Great  Britain  ! 

It  was  in  1826,  the  news  reached  the  indefatigable  founder 
of  the  Mission,  that  it  was  again  threatened  with  being  broken 
up ; much  violence  was  experienced  from  the  natives,  but 
Mr.  Williams  stated  in  his  letter  to  Mr.  Marsden,  “ It  is,  I 
believe,  our  united  determination  to  remain  until  we  are 
driven  away ; when  the  natives  are  in  our  houses,  carrying 
away  our  property,  it  will  then  be  time  for  us  to  take  refuge 
in  our  boats."  Mr.  Marsden,  therefore,  lost  no  time  in  visit- 
ing New  Zealand,  to  stop  the  abandonment  of  the  Mission. 
He  sailed  in  H.  M.  ship  Rainbow , April  5th,  1827.  But,  on 
reaching  New  Zealand,  he  was  rejoiced  to  find  that  the  pros- 
pect had  again  brightened,  and  the  Mission  was  once  more 
bidding  fair  to  prosper;  he,  therefore,  only  remained  four 
days,  and  writing  to  the  Church  Missionary  Society,  stated, 
it  gave  him  much  pleasure  to  find  the  Missionaries  so 
comfortable,  living  in  unity  and  godly  love,  devoting  them- 
selves to  the  work." 

February  16th,  1830,  Mr.  Marsden  sailed  on  his  sixth 
visit,  accompanied  by  his  daughter.  Miss  Mary  Marsden  : he 

this  tribe  ? They  said,  No.  Is  not  this  their  sacred  day  ? I know  it  is  yours. 
He  then  exclaimed,  with  equal  astonishment  and  indignation,  See  how  they 
trade  ! They  must  be  a mean  tribe.  The  vessel  was  taken,  but -“afterwards 
given  up  again  to  the  Missionaries. 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


595 


readied  the  Bay  at  a very  important  and  critical  time.  War 
had  broken  out  amongst  the  natives,  and  the  Chiefs  were 
haranguing  their  men  as  the  vessel  hove  in  sight,  but 
immediately  the  news  spread  that  Mr.  Marsden  had  arrived, 
it  put  a stop  to  the  battle.  He  lost  no  time  in  visiting  the 
hostile  parties,  and  after  some  difficulties  and  delay,  suc- 
ceeded in  his  benevolent  efforts,  and  peace  was  made.  On 
the  11th  April,  he  witnessed  the  baptism  of  a man  and  two 
women  ; he  was  likewise  gratified  with  the  flourishing  state  of 
the  schools,  every  individual  in  them  knowing  the  Church 
Catechism,  and  the  chief  truths  of  the  Gospel,  many  also 
could  write,  and  were  acquainted  with  the  first  rules  of 
arithmetic. 

The  natives  were  quite  enthusiastic  in  their  reception  of  their 
common  benefactor ; they  welcomed  him  with  songs,  dancing, 
and  firing  of  guns ; on  one  occasion  more  than  2,000  armed 
men  were  present ; he  was  surrounded  by  hundreds  as  he 
went  from  place  to  place  ; on  the  2nd  April,  he  visited  Ran- 
gihu : there  on  the  highest  mound  were  Ruatara  and  his  son 
interred ; the  latter,  a promising  young  man,  who  was  to 
have  returned  to  Parramatta,  died  the  very  morning  of  Mr. 
Marsden* s arrival ; during  his  illness,  he  would  often  say, 
Oh  ! what  would  Mr.  Marsden  say  were  he  to  come  whilst 
the  New  Zealanders  are  fighting,  he  would  be  very  angry. 
Mr.  Marsden's  health  being  very  indifferent,  his  friends 
hastened  his  return  before  the  winter,  or  rainy  season  set 
in,  and  on  the  16th  of  June  he  reached  Sydney. 

After  this  visit  of  the  venerable  and  indefatigable  founder 
of  the  Mission,  the  work  began  steadily  to  increase.  The 
Gospel  had  reached  the  hearts  of  the  savage  natives,  and 
now  began  to  show  its  power;  they  who  had  received  it 
could  not  keep  the  glad  news  to  themselves,  but  went  and 
proclaimed  it  amongst  their  friends,  and  even  risked  life  to 
carry  it  to  their  foes,  that  they  also  might  know  what  God 
had  done  for  their  souls. 

The  station  at  Kaitaia  in  the  north  was  commenced,  and 
at  the  Thames,  Matamata,  and  Waikato,  fresh  ground  was 
occupied.  The  Missionary  could  now  traverse  the  country 

Q Q 2 


596 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


with  some  degree  of  safety,  although  the  natives  themselves 
were  unable  to  do  so.  An  instance  of  this  occurred  at  the 
Waikato ; when  the  brethren  first  attempted  to  cross  that 
river  on  moki,  or  canoes  formed  of  bundles  of  sedge  tied 
together,  no  other  means  being  presented,  the  natives 
spied  them  approaching,  and  taking  them  for  enemies,  im- 
mediately levelled  their  guns ; the  Missionaries  tied  a white 
handkerchief  to  the  end  of  a paddle,  and  hoisted  it  up ; it 
was  no  sooner  seen  than  down  went  the  guns,  and  they  were 
permitted  to  proceed  in  peace.*  Rotorua  also  was  occupied, 
and  afterwards  Tauranga,  although  wars  still  raged,  and 
dreadful  acts  of  cannibalism  continued  to  be  perpetrated,  the 
Gospel,  in  spite  of  all  opposition,  rapidly  progressed.  All 
these  places  were  occupied  between  the  years  1832-5. 

February  9th,  1837,  Mr.  Marsden,  accompanied  by  his 
youngest  daughter  Martha,  sailed  in  the  Pyramus,  on  his 
seventh  and  last  visit.  He  was  then  in  his  seventy-second 
year;  with  holy  joy  he  beheld  how  wonderfully  the  work  had 
expanded,  stations  had  been  formed  at  the  Thames,  at  Tau- 
ranga, and  in  the  interior,  although  war  was  again  raging, 
still  there  was  every  prospect  of  final  success ; the  aged  man’s 
heart  rejoiced,  he  had  seen  the  beginning,  he  now  saw  it 
in  its  increase,  and  was  enabled  to  bless  God ; his  feelings 
must  have  been  gratified  by  the  universal  respect  and  love 
manifested  towards  him ; even  the  heathen  natives  viewed 
him  as  their  common  friend  and  benefactor,  but  the  Chris- 
tians, as  their  beloved  father  in  Christ.  At  Kaitaia  the 
entire  native  population  assembled  to  see  their  aged  bene- 
factor ; some  kept  stedfastly  looking  at  him,  and  when  told 
to  give  place  to  others,  they  said,  stay,  let  us  still  look  upon 
our  father’s  countenance,  for  this  is  the  last  time  we  shall 
ever  see  him  here ; he  visited  all  the  Stations  in  H.  M.  S. 
JRattlesnalce , Captain  Hobson,  afterwards  the  first  Governor 


* A similar  thing  occurred  to  the  writer  when  he  first  visited  Patea  in  the 
interior,  being  the  first  European  who  had  done  so,  a chief  rushed  down  upon 
the  little  party  with  a huge  blunderbuss,  when  we  told  him  who  we  were,  down 
went  the  formidable  weapon,  and  the  next  minute  the  Missionary  was  saluted 
with  the  hongi,  or  rubbing  noses. 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


597 


of  New  Zealand ; he  passed  through  Cook's  Straits,,  and  by 
that  way  returned  to  Sydney. 

Mr.  Brown  states  : “ Mr.  Marsden  preached  this  morning 
from  Romans  viii.,  38,  39. — His  earthly  tabernacle  is  much 
shaken,  but  glory  is  shining  through  the  chinks ; it  was  an 
affecting  yet  delightful  spectacle,  to  see  him  in  the  pulpit : his 
eyes,  too  weak  to  read  even  the  text  correctly,  yet  beaming 
with  immortality,  when  dwelling  on  the  Christian's  triumph 
over  life  and  death,  things  present  and  things  to  come, 
through  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord," 
A most  suitable  text  to  form  the  final  address  of  this  aged 
servant  and  apostle  of  the  Lord,  and  well  calculated  to  shew 
the  stedfastness  of  his  own  faith,  and  to  confirm  that  of  his 
hearers. 

Nothing  more  remains  to  be  said;  when  his  work  was 
finished  in  New  Zealand,  little  remained  for  him  to  do  else- 
where. On  Christmas-day  of  the  same  year,  the  Bishop  of 
Australia  preached  at  Paihia,  and  confirmed  there,  just 
twenty-three  years  from  the  time  of  Mr.  Marsden's  first 
sermon. 

Chevalier  Captain  Dillon,  a Roman  Catholic  gentleman,  in 
his  interesting  narrative  respecting  the  fate  of  La  Perouse, 
called  him  the  apostle  of  the  South  Seas.  Indeed,  Mr. 
Marsden's  thoughts,  though  chiefly  resting  on  New  Zealand, 
were  not  confined  to  it ; he  took  the  warmest  interest  in 
every  mission,  and  aided  each  to  the  utmost  of  his  power, 
and  so  general  was  the  confidence  reposed  in  this  Catholic 
hearted  servant  of  God  that  the  London  Missionary  Society 
appointed  hirti  one  of  its  directors ; he  exhibited  a similar 
feeling  for  the  Wesleyan  Mission,  of  which  he  might  also 
be  called  the  founder,  his  was  truly  an  enlarged  spirit,  his 
heart's  desire  was,  the  establishment  of  his  Lord's  kingdom 
on  earth,  by  whatever  hands  it  might  be  accomplished. 

July  27,  1837. — Mr.  Marsden  returned  to  New  South 
Wales ; and  the  following  May,  whilst  on  a ministerial  visit 
to  Windsor,  he  was  suddenly  taken  ill  in  the  clergyman’s 
house ; his  last  words  were  “ New  Zealand,"  and  thus  ter- 
minated this  good  man's  long  course  of  usefulness.  No 


598 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


funeral  had  ever  taken  place  in  New  South  Wales  which  was 
attended  like  his  : all  were  there,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest — the  members  of  Government — the  clergy — the  laity 
— the  rich — the  poor — the  Presbyterian — the  Wesleyan — 
and  even  the  Roman  Catholic ; indeed,  nothing  could  exceed 
the  general  respect  paid  him  at  his  death  and  in  his  life.  Mr. 
Marsden  was  plain  and  simple  in  his  manners.  To  those  who 
knew  him  a warm-hearted  friend,  his  home  was  open  to  all 
— he  gave  no  invitations,  but  was  angry  if  his  friends  did 
not  go  without  one;  he  had  always  some  New  Zealanders 
about  him,  esteeming  them  superior  to  every  other  abori- 
ginal race ; he  once  told  me  he  met  a Maori  living  up  the 
country,  and  asked  him  what  he  was  doing ; he  said  he 
had  kept  a store  in  the  interior,  until  he  was  robbed  by 
bush-rangers,  who  took  away  all  but  chairs  and  tables,  then 
his  creditors  came,  and  a man  got  up,  and  knock,  knock, 
went  his  hammer,  until  chairs,  tables,  and  everything  re- 
maining went  also,  but  I am  going  to  sea,  and  when  I get  a 
little  money,  I shall  begin  business  again  ; now  here,  said 
he,  you  see  the  energy  of  the  New  Zealanders,  they  are  sure 
to  be  a great  people. 

One  of  the  earliest  sayings  of  a New  Zealander  which 
interested  Mr.  Marsden,  was  in  reply  to  his  question,  What 
did  he  think  of  God  ? He  replied,  he  is  an  eternal  shadow. 
On  one  occasion,  when  he  had  his  youngest  daughter  with 
him  in  a gig,  he  was  stopped  by  a highway  man,  or  bush- 
ranger as  they  are  called,  who  demanded  his  money,  Mr. 
Marsden  remonstrated  with  him,  and  spoke  to  him  of  his 
sins,  the  man  said,  it  does  not  signify,  I am  in  for  it,  it  is 
too  late  now  to  mend,  and  told  him  to  give  over  preaching, 
bidding  his  daughter  empty  her  father’s  pockets,  and  give 
him  the  money,  which  she  did,  Mr.  Marsden  still  continu- 
ing his  lecture,  and  telling  him  the  next  time  he  saw  him 
would  be  at  the  gallows.  Some  time  after,  a man  was  to  be 
hung,  who  sent  for  him  to  attend  him  in  his  last  hours ; 
he  then  recognized  the  person  who  had  robbed  him,  he  said, 
your  word  has  turned  out  true,  here  you  meet  me  at  the 
gallows,  Mr.  Marsden  prayed  fervently  for  him,  the  criminal 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


599 


seemed  to  respond  with  all  his  heart,  and  then  the  drop 
fell,  he  was  a Roman  Catholic,  and  I believe  his  name  was 
O'Donohu,  a notorious  bush-ranger. 

Mr.  Marsden  was  wont  to  remark,  that  the  Lord  had 
manifested  His  wonderful  power  in  the  infant  colony  by 
gathering  from  the  vilest  scum  of  the  earth  a people  for 
himself ; and  he  might  have  added,  and  making  that  people, 
so  opportunely  raised  up  in  the  Australian  wilderness,  the 
grand  point  d’ctjopui  of  all  the  Polynesian  Missions,  which 
could  not  have  existed  without  a colony  there,  to  furnish 
supplies  and  aid  in  all  their  necessities. 

Few  persons  have  received  more  praise  or  abuse  than 
Mr.  Marsden ; his  enemies  were  many  and  bitter ; they 
accused  him  of  penuriousness,  and  a sordid  desire  of  gaining 
money,  and  yet  few  kept  so  hospitable  a house,  or  knew 
so  little  of  his  own  affairs  as  he  did ; one  of  his  daughters 
related  to  me  a circumstance,  which  she  witnessed  : — A gen- 
tleman called  one  day,  and  said,  he  came  to  repay  the  money 
he  had  borrowed  of  him  many  years  before.  Mr.  Marsden 
said,  you  must  make  a mistake,  I am  not  aware  yo~  'wve  me 
anything.  0 ! said  the  gentleman,  I am  not  mistaken,  it  w^s 
when  I first  landed  on  these  shores  an  indigent  youth,  that  you 
most  liberally  advanced  me  a hundred  pounds,  to  set  me  up 
in  trade ; and  by  God's  blessing,  that  laid  the  foundation 
of  my  prosperity,  I am  now  a rich  man  ; and  here  are  your 
hundred  pounds,  with  interest  and  my  grateful  thanks  for 
your  disinterested  kindness ; in  vain  Mr.  Marsden  refused, 
he  was  compelled  to  take  both.  Miss  Marsden  was  present 
on  that  occasion;  but  there  were  doubtless  many  similar 
ones  which  never  will  be  known  until  that  day  when  all  things 
shall  be  revealed. 

When  Dr.  Lang  was  building  the  first  Presbyterian  church 
in  Sydney,  and  could  not  proceed  for  want  of  funds,  what  did 
this  Catholic-minded  man  do  ? he  was  the  senior  chaplain  of 
the  colony,  and  at  that  time  without  a rival  creed ; did  he 
view  with  jealousy  this  inroad  on  his  own  peculiar  province, 
and  rejoice  that  the  church  could  not  be  finished  ? Ho  : 
unsolicited,  he  wrote  to  the  Presbyterian  minister,  offered 


600 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


funds  for  its  completion,  and  those  too  without  asking  or 
receiving  any  interest ; the  sum  lent  was,  I believe,  £500,  the 
church,  which  but  for  this  opportune  aid,  its  founder  could  not 
have  completed,  was  erected.  So  likewise,  when  the  Wes- 
ley ans  were  talking  of  a chapel  at  Windsor,  where  Mr.  Marsden 
had  land,  he  gave  a sufficient  extent  on  which  to  erect  a mission 
house  and  chapel  as  his  donation. 

The  following  is  an  extract  of  his  letter  on  the  occasion, 
which  is  equally  creditable  to  both  parties  To  give  you 
the  right  hand  of  fellowship,  is  no  more  than  my  indispensable 
duty.  You  may  rely  with  confidence  on  my  continued  sup- 
port and  co-operation  in  all  you*  dable  attempts  to  benefit 
the  inhabitants  of  this  pop1’1  n-\  I am  fully  persuaded 

that  your  ministerial  k1  . o promote  the  welfare 

of  these  settlemer  eternal  interests  of  im- 
mortal souls  of  convicts  from  Europe  is 

very  grp"  • audreds  have  just  landed  on  our 

sho^"  u os  of  the  British  Empire  ; hundreds 

^>our,  ready  to  disembark ; and  hundreds 
o bosom  of  the  great  deep,  and  hourly  expected, 
not  expect  that  governors,  magistrates,  and  police- 
> can  find  a remedy  for  the  moral  diseases  with  which 
mose  convicts  are  infected.  Heaven  itself  has  provided  the 
only  remedy,  which  is  the  blessed  Balm  of  Gilead.  We  must 
expect  great  discouragements ; but  let  us  go  on  sounding  the 
rams’  horns  ; the  walls  of  Jericho  will  and  must  fall  in  time. 
We  are  feeble  ; but  the  Lord  is  mighty,  and  will  bring  Israel 
to  Mount  Zion.  I pray  that  the  Divine  blessing  may  attend 
all  your  labors  for  the  salvation  of  souls  in  this  colony.” 

When  his  funeral  sermon  was  preached  at  Parramatta,  the 
Wesleyan  superintendent  wrote  : — Next  Sunday  morning  we 
intend  to  close  our  chapel ; and,  as  a mark  of  respect  to  the 
memory  of  this  venerable  man,  go  to  church  to  hear  his  funeral 
sermon.* 

The  testimony  of  the  first  Bishop  of  New  Zealand,  Dr. 
Selwyn,  on  his  arrival  in  1842,  may  be  added  by  way  of 
epitaph: — “We  see  here  a whole  nation  of  pagans  converted 


* See  Life  of  Rev.  S.  Leigh , page  105. 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


601 


to  the  faith.  A few  faithful  men,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  have  been  the  instruments  of  adding  another  Chris- 
tian people  to  the  family  of  God.  Young  men  and  maidens, 
old  men  and  children,  all  with  one  heart  and  with  one  voice 
praising  God ; all  offering  up  daily  their  morning  and  evening 
prayers ; all  searching  the  Scriptures,  to  find  the  way  of 
eternal  life ; all  valuing  the  Word  of  God  above  every  other 
gift ; all  in  a greater  or  less  degree,  bringing  forth,  and 
visibly  displaying  in  their  o ard  lives,  some  fruits  of  the 
influences  of  the  Spirit.  will  you  find,  throughout 

the  Christian  world,  nn  nfestations  of  the  pre- 
sence of  that  Spirit,  or  mo  nces  of  the  kingdom 

of  Christ  ? 33 

Here  then  we  close  this  brief  he  declaration 

of  Bishop  Broughton,  that  althoug.  "^st  legally- 

appointed  Bishop  of  Australia,  he  i y consider 

Samuel  Marsden  to  have  been  the  first  a^ 

But  stay,  there  is  a still  more  suitable  teru;..»L»,vii.v  an 
I visited  England  in  1855,  my  natives,  though  . 
of  them  ever  seen  the  good  man  who  had  done  so  - • , ; ■ 
their  race,  thought  it  was  a suitable  time  for  testify ii 
love  to  his  memory;  ten  guineas  were  collected  and  given 
for  a tablet,  to  be  erected  in  his  church  at  Parramatta,  an 
this,  on  my  return,  I delivered  to  the  Rev.  T.  Hassall,  his 
son-in-law,  for  that  purpose,  and  though  a plain  simple  white 
marble  slab,  is  one  far  more  honorable  and  telling  to  his 
memory,  than  the  noblest  which  his  friends  and  relatives 
could  erect.  It  had,  moreover,  the  honor  of  being  the  first 
tribute  of  respect  paid  to  him  of  this  kind,  when  it  arrived  in 
July  1856  : — 

SACRED  TO  THE  MEMORY 

OF  THE 

REV.  SAMUEL  MARSDEN, 

THE  FATHER  OF  THE  AUSTRALIAN  CHURCH, 

AND 

THE  FOUNDER  OF  THE  NEW  ZEALAND  MISSION, 

THIS  TRIBUTE  TO  HIS  MEMORY 

WAS  PLACED  BY  A 

NEW  ZEALAND  MISSIONARY  AND  HIS  NATIVE  CONVERTS 
Obit.  May  12,  1838 — Aged  73. 


NORFOLK  AND  PHILIP’S  ISLANDS 


CHAPTER  XXXIY. 


NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 

The  Zoology  of  a cluster  of  lone  islands  in  the  Southern 
Hemisphere,  which  although  of  considerable  size  and  extent 
are  singularly  deficient  in  land  animals,  does  not  appear  to 
present  much  to  interest  the  inquirer  in  this  department ; 
but  if  New  Zealand  has  been  so  destitute  in  this  respect,  it 
has  been  inhabited  up  to  a very  recent  period  by  several 
families  of  wingless  birds,  which  were  of  such  vast  propor- 
tions as  to  be  justly  termed  ornithological  giants. 

Nor  is  it  even  yet  certain  that  there  may  not  be  some  of 
these  huge  birds  still  in  existence,  like  the  kiwi,  which  belongs 
to  the  same  struthious  family,  they  were  most  probably  night 
birds,  and  resembled  the  solitaire,  in  being  inhabitants  of  the 
most  retired  spots.  The  long  range  of  the  New  Zealand  alps 


APUS  CYCLOPS 


D IALANTH  US 


TAYLOR  I 


REV:  R.TAYLOROEL. 


W.  DICKES  SC.  LONDON. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


603 


with  their  snowy  summits  are  even  yet  little  known,  but  it  is 
from  those  who  have  been  their  chief  explorers,  that  the  best 
evidence  of  their  existence  is  derived.  Dr.  Hector,  the 
Government  Geologist,  found  their  tracks  in  those  Alpine 
solitudes,  paths  two  feet  in  width  running  through  the 
Manuka  Scrub.  Mr.  Mailing  discovered  their  foot-prints ; 
gold  diggers  declare  they  have  even  seen  the  bird  itself,  but 
Dr.  Haast,  our  enterprising  naturalist,  has  actually  heard 
their  call ; his  statement  is  as  follows  : — 

“ I believe  I have  convincing  proof,  that  in  those  never- 
before  trodden  Alpine  forests  (Canterbury  province),  there 
exists  a large  kiwi,  the  existence  of  which  till  the  present  time 
was  quite  unknown;  I have  heard  many  times  the  roa,  the  large 
kiwi  of  the  western  coast,  but  his  call  is  like  the  cry  of  a child 
to  the  voice  of  a powerful  man,  when  compared  to  the  call 
which  we  heard  in  the  Alps  while  encamped  at  the  edge  of 
an  extensive  forest ; it  was  towards  midnight,  and  though 
fast  asleep,  ws  were  all  awakened  by  this  remarkably  loud 
call.”  I cannot  doubt,  therefore,  that  Dr.  Haast  and  his 
companions  have  really  heard  the  cry  of  that  struthious  giant 
— the  moa. 

The  bones  of  this  bird  are  found  widely  spread  over  both 
islands,  but  further  notice  is  deferred  until  one  is  actually 
captured,  which  may  be  confidently  expected  before  long. 
The  fossil  remains  are  confined  to  those  of  birds,  excepting 
of  a solitary  saurian,  said  to  have  been  found  in  the  oolite  of 
the  Middle  Island,  which  Professor  Owen  pronounced  to  be 
a plesiosaurian,  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  specimen  really 
came  at  all  from  New  Zealand. 

The  mammalia  are  supposed  to  have  only  the  rat  to  repre- 
sent them,  but  there  is  little  doubt  now  of  the  existence  of 
another.  When  Captain  Cook  was  at  Dusky  Bay  in  1773, 
he  stated  : — “ For  three  or  four  days  after  we  arrived  in 
Pickersgill  Harbour,  and  as  we  were  clearing  the  woods  to 
set  up  our  tents,  &c.,  a four-footed  animal  was  seen  by  three 
or  four  of  our  people ; but  as  no  two  gave  the  same  descrip- 
tion of  it,  I cannot  say  of  what  kind  it  was  : all,  however, 
agreed  that  it  was  about  the  size  of  a cat,  with  short  legs. 


604 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


and  of  a mouse  colour ; one  of  the  seamen,  and  he  who  had 
the  best  view  of  it,  said  it  had  a bushy  tail,  and  was  the  most 
like  a jackall  of  any  animal  he  knew;  the  most  probable  con- 
jecture is,  that  it  is  a new  species ; be  this  as  it  may,  we 
are  now  certain  that  this  country  is  not  so  destitute  of  quad- 
rupeds as  was  once  thought/”*  This  account  has  recently 
been  confirmed  by  reports  from  the  neighbourhood  of 
Wakatipu  Lake.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  there  is 
another,  which  is  known  to  the  natives  by  the  name  of  hau- 
rehe,  but  it  is  of  a very  retired  character,  and  extremely  rare. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  a beaver  rat  which  has  occasionally 
been  met  with.  But  leaving  these  semi-apocryphal  animals 
for  the  future  naturalist  to  describe,  we  now  proceed  to  the 
consideration  of  the  known  fauna. 

New  Zealand  possesses  two  kinds  of  bat ; the  vespertilio 
tuberculatus , a very  small  one,  yellowish  brown,  with  di- 
minutive rounded  ears,  it  is  found  in  every  part  of  these 
islands.  There  is  also  a larger  one  in  Cook's  Straits,  but  it 
has  not  been  described,  the  general  Maori  name  for  both  is 
pekapeka.  The  mus  rattus,  More,  is  not  above  half  the  size 
of  the  imported  rat,  which  has  nearly  exterminated  it.  Once 
it  was  very  abundant  and  greatly  prized  as  an  article  of  food, 
it  chiefly  fed  on  the  mast  of  the  tawai  betula  nigra,  more 
generally  known  as  the  black  birch ; there  is  also  a smaller 
variety,  black,  with  a short  tail,  terminated  with  a little  tuft 
of  hair,  a third  larger  than  the  common  mouse ; the  English, 
or  rather  Norway  rat,  is  called  by  the  natives  pouhawaiki, 
More  pakeha,  and  kainga  rua,  it  is  now  very  numerous. 

The  New  Zealand  dog,  canis  familiaris  kuri,  was  small  and 
long  haired,  of  a dirty  white  or  yellow  color,  with  a bushy 
tail,  this  the  natives  state  they  brought  with  them  when  they 
first  came  to  these  islands,  it  is  not  improbable,  however, 
that  they  found  another  kind  already  in  the  country,  brought 
by  the  older  Melanesian  race,  of  a larger  size,  with  long 
white  hair  and  black  tail,  it  is  said  to  have  been  very  quiet 
and  docile,  and  was  known  by  the  name  pataka  tawhiti,  but 
both  these  are  now  quite  lost  in  the  host  of  introduced  ones. 

* Cook's  Voyages , vol.  i,  page  380.  Smith  & Elder. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


605 


The  seal,  fam.  Phocidce,  was  once  very  abundant  in  all  the 
New  Zealand  isles,  but  especially  in  the  middle  one.  In 
1811,  a sealer  procured  a cargo  of  80,000  skins  from  the 
Macquarie  Islands.  The  morse,  or  sea  lion,  Platyrhynchus 
leoninus,  wakahao,  was  found  in  the  Middle  Island,  it  is 
described  as  being  the  size  of  a cow,  of  a red  color,  very 
savage  and  powerful,  as  a proof  of  which,  the  natives  state 
that  formerly  one  of  their  warriors  was  put  to  flight  by  one 
of  these  animals,  although  he  was  attended  by  a party  of 
seventy,  hence  the  proverb,  Te  hoa  JcaJcari  o Te  Wera,  he 
waka-hao — The  angry  foe  of  Te  Wera  was  a sea  lion. 

The  sea  bear,  Arcto  cephalus  ursinus,  rapoka , came  next  in 
point  of  size,  the  native  way  of  capturing  it  was  by  throwing 
sand  into  its  eyes,  and  whilst  striving  to  free  itself  from  the 
annoyance  they  fell  upon  and  killed  it. 

The  common  seal,  Phoca  Yitulina,  mimiha,  kekeno , was 
once  very  numerous,  the  names  of  its  haunts  are  still  retained, 
but  it  is  now  seldom  seen.  Its  remains  are  found  in  every 
shell  heap  along  the  New  Zealand  shores,  mingled  with  those 
of  birds,  fish,  dogs,  and  men  ; it  is  now  confined  entirely  to 
the  south.  The  natives  speak  of  another  kind  of  seal,  to 
which  they  give  the  name  of  Waitoreke,  and  describe  it  as  a 
large  and  long  animal.* 

* A Chief  came  to  me  one  day,  and  inquired  whether  there  were  men  and 
women  living  in  the  sea.  I demanded  the  reason  of  the  question  being  put  to 
me.  He  said,  that  whilst  a boat’s  crew  was  going  for  the  Rev.  Mr.  Reay,  in 
Cloudy  Bay,  a figure  suddenly  appeared  in  the  water,  at  a distance  of  about 
three  yards  ; they  left  off  rowing,  and  gazed  at  it  for  a long  time  ; it  resembled 
a black  man  of  the  usual  size,  but  was  bald  on  the  head,  and  with  mustaches 
sticking  out  about  four  inches.  As  they  approached,  it  laid  on  the  water  like  a 
log,  and  one  said  it  was  a log,  another  that  it  was  a kumete , or  large  wooden 
bowl,  turned  upside  down  ; but,  as  they  drew  near,  it  rose  up,  and  appeared  to  be 
a black  man,  as  far  as  the  waist  ; it  looked  stedfastly  at  them,  and  kept  puffing 
with  his  mouth  : it  was  a perfect  man,  only  bald,  and  had  a queer  stiff- looking 
mustache  ; one  proposed  to  throw  a rope  round  it,  and  pull  it  into  the  boat; 
another  said,  No,  it  is  a taniwa  (sea  god),  and  will  smash  the  boat ; it  continued 
looking  at  them,  and  puffing  for  about  an  hour,  and  then  went  down  ; they 
told  Mr.  Reay  of  it,  and  said  they  had  never  seen  such  a creature  before,  and 
asked  whether  we  pakehas  had.  I asked  whether  it  was  not  a seal ; they  said 
no,  it  was  a perfect  man  as  far  as  the  waist — the  lower  part  was  concealed  in 
the  water. — From  Tamihana , 1847. 


606 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


The  porpoise,  Fam.  Delphinidoe,  has  the  Delphinus  Zea- 
landise,  tujooupou , to  represent  it,  which  is  as  abundant  in  the 
southern  seas  as  it  is  in  the  northern ; there  are  two  kinds, 
the  larger  one  with  an  elongated  snout,  and  a smaller  one 
without  one  at  all.  The  natives  describe  a third,  the  TJpoho 
hue,  a large  kind.  Of  the  Fam.  Baloenidoe  may  first  be 
noticed  Physeter  Macrocephalus,  or  sperm  whale,  the  Cache- 
lot  of  Cuvier,  Paraoa.  It  is  the  great  fish  of  the  south  seas, 
and  probably  equals  if  not  exceeds  in  bulk,  though,  perhaps, 
not  in  length,  the  monarch  of  the  northern  ocean  ; it  is  cer- 
tainly by  far  the  most  valuable  fish  we  are  acquainted  with, 
its  ordinary  length  being  eighty-five  feet,  and  circumference 
thirty -five.  It  is  found  of  different  colors,  some  being  white, 
others  black,  or  of  an  ochreous  or  dingy  red,  and  frequently 
of  a mottled  color.  The  sperm  whale  produces  ambergris ; 
a single  one  contains  upwards  of  a ton  of  spermaceti,  or  more 
than  ten  large  barrels. 

The  Baloena  Antarctica,  or  right  southern  whale,  Tohora, 
is  usually  from  thirty-five  to  fifty  feet  long  ; the  baleen  in  a 
whale  of  forty  feet,  is  nine  feet  long,  and  the  oil  averages  ten 
tons. 

The  Borqualus  Antarctica  Cuvier,  Pajoate,  or  Balcenoptera 
Australis  (Lesson,  R.),  the  genuine  character  is  the  presence 
of  longitudinal  folds  on  the  abdomen,  it  is  said  to  possess  a 
dorsal  fin,  the  body  is  black  above  and  white  beneath,  the 
folds  when  put  aside,  being  of  a pinkish  color ; the  oil 
is  less  in  quantity,  but  finer ; the  baleen  also  is  too  short  to 
be  of  much  value,  this  fish  is  very  difficult  and  dangerous  to 
capture,*  it  attains  a length  of  thirty- three  feet. 

The  Baloena  Gibbosa,  or  Humpback,  f derives  its  name 
from  the  fleshy  protuberances  on  its  back,  it  differs  only  from 
the  Mysticetus  in  being  of  less  size,  and  in  having  these 
humps.  Some  of  the  humpbacks  have  yielded  as  much  as 
seventy  barrels  of  oil ; there  are  instances  of  this  fish  having 
two  or  three  humps,  but  it  is  very  rarely  seen  with  more 
than  two,  one  near  the  head  and  another  near  the  tail,  these 
whales  are  gregarious,  and  swim  in  shoals. 

* Dr.  Knox.  f Polack. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


607 


The  Physalis,  or  Finback,*  is  a much  longer  fish,  but  of 
less  circumference,  it  is  distinguished  afar  off  by  a fin  pro- 
jecting from  the  hinder  part  of  the  back,  standing  erect, 
from  three  to  six  feet  in  height ; this  whale  yields  from 
twenty  to  thirty  barrels  of  oil,  but  it  is  so  difficult  to  capture 
that  whalers  seldom  attempt  it ; the  finback  is  extremely 
tenacious  of  life,  its  head  is  sharp,  with  the  upper  jaw  latnel- 
lated,  the  under  lip  closes  over  the  baleen,  which  is  smaller 
than  that  of  the  right  whale. 

The  Pike-headed  Baloena,f  Mango  nui  or  black  physeter, 
has  a much  more  pointed  head  than  the  finback,  but  in  other 
respects  differs  very  little  from  it. 

The  Musculus,  or  large  lipped  whale, f has  an  immense 
under  lip,  the  upper  part  of  the  head  ends  in  a snout,  the 
throat  of  this  fish  is  larger  than  in  other  whales ; the  mus- 
culus is  found  sixty  feet  in  length  by  thirty  in  circumference, 
it  devours  small  fish,  in  addition  to  its  other  food ; there  are 
three  fins  on  its  back.  The  natives  enumerate  eight  different 
kinds  of  whale — 

1.  The  Paraoa.  5.  Pakeke,  or  momori. 

2.  Tohora,  or  Wara-wara,  or  6.  Niho-ngore. 

Mimiha.  7.  Ngutu-hue. 

8.  Papati.  8.  Ngutu-pi. 

4.  Popoia-ngore. 

The  birds  of  New  Zealand  amount  to  one  hundred  and 
thirty-six,  and  of  these  seventy-three  may  be  said  to  belong 
to  the  land,  and  in  a great  measure  to  be  peculiar  to  those 
isles ; it  is  singular  that  whilst  the  honey  or  humming 
birds  of  other  parts  are  the  smallest  known  representatives 
of  their  rate,  those  of  New  Zealand  are  amongst  the  largest 
of  the  family,  and  that  whilst  Europe  does  not  possess  a 
single  parrot,  there  should  be  at  least  half-a-dozen  kinds  in 
New  Zealand,  and  one  too  which  differs  from  all  others,  in 
selecting  alpine  solitudes  and  arctic  cold  to  warmer  spots, 
whilst  another  partakes  of  the  appearance  of  the  owl  as 
much  as  of  the  parrot  in  its  form ; but  whilst  there  is  this 

* Polack.  f Polack. 


608 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


disproportion  between  those  of  the  land  and  of  sea,  the 
latter,  though  fewer  in  species,  greatly  preponderate  in 
number ; there  are  probably  twenty-four  families  of  them 
which  may  be  strictly  said  to  belong  to  the  shores.  The 
traveller  through  the  New  Zealand  forest  seldom  sees  more 
than  one  or  two  solitary  ones  flitting  across  his  path ; and, 
except  the  matin  and  evening  song  of  the  sylvan  warblers, 
or  the  occasional  harsh  cry  of  the  parrot,  Kaha,  there  is 
nothing  to  break  the  oppressive  silence  which  reigns  in  their 
deep  recesses.  The  burst  of  melody,  however,  which  hails 
the  early  dawn  when  the  varied  songsters  of  the  grove  unite 
in  raising  their  morning  hymn,  may  be  considered  as  a 
sufficient  compensation  for  their  silence  during  the  day. 

The  position  of  these  islands  being  intermediate  between 
the  tropical  and  polar  regions,  causes  some  birds  from  each 
to  visit  them.  From  the  warmer  regions  two  species  of  the 
cuckoo,  the  Endynamys  taitensis  kohaperoa  and  Koekoea 
Chrysocercyx  lucidus  Pipiwharauroa , arrive  in  spring,  they 
are  called  the  birds  of  Hawaiki ; the  Koekoea  is  said  by 
some  to  hibernate  in  New  Zealand,  by  burying  itself  in  the 
mud  at  the  bottom  of  rivers ; the  Taupo  natives  state  that 
this  bird  dives  down  in  the  lake  and  remains  there  until 
the  spring,  others  imagine  that  they  enter  holes,  and  there 
remain  until  the  next  summer,  it  is  singular  that  a similar 
idea  of  the  swallow  should  be  entertained  at  home ; another 
occasional  visitor  is  the  frigate  bird,  Fregata  aguila , from  the 
north,  it  is  however  but  rarely  seen. 

The  Zosterops,  a small  migratory  bird  (f am.  Litscinidce)  made 
its  appearance  in  the  north  isle  in  the  winter  of  1856;  a few 
years  before  it  was  seen  in  the  Middle  Island  for  the  first  time, 
and  was  previously  observed  in  the  Auckland  Isles,  this  little 
stranger  is  supposed  originally  to  have  migrated  from  Tas- 
mania or  Australia,  where  it  is  found,  its  arrival  was  hailed  as 
a blessing,  being  insectiverous,  and  feeding  on  the  American 
blight,  which  has  been  very  destructive  to  the  apple  tree  in 
New  Zealand;  in  winter  it  appears  in  flocks,  and  soon  clears 
the  trees  of  their  noxious  parasites,  but  as  the  spring  advances 
it  retires  to  the  snowy  mountains,  and  is  not  seen  during  the 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


609 


summer  months,  so  that  the  blight  again  recovers  its  power, 
and  thus  the  little  stranger  is  only  of  doubtful  benefit. 

The  New  Zealand  birds  are  remarkable  for  their  tameness 
and  the  little  fear  they  entertain  of  man ; probably  the  paucity 
of  their  numbers  may  in  a great  measure  be  owing  to  this 
circumstance.  The  robin,  Totoara,  the  wren,  Miro-miro , and 
the  flycatcher,  Piwakawaka,  will  often  allow  themselves  to 
be  taken  by  the  hand,  and  even  alight  upon  the  person. 
They  are  evidently  on  the  decrease  ; the  introduction  of  the 
cat  and  dog  has  almost  sealed  their  doom.  The  rails,  kiwi,  and 
kakapo,  especially  the  two  latter,  have  sensibly  diminished; 
the  only  one  of  the  small  birds  which  has  maintained  its 
numbers  is  the  Pihoi-koi,  or  ground  lark. 

The  most  remarkable  of  the  New  Zealand  birds  is  the 
apteryx  (fam.  Struthionidoe) , there  are  still  four  surviving 
members  of  that  family,  the  Kiwi  apteryx  Australis,  Ta- 
koeka  A.  Owenii,  A.  Mantellii,  Boa  A.  Maxima.  These 
birds  are  yet  abundant  in  several  parts  of  the  country ; the 
kiwi  in  size  is  not  larger  than  a common  full-grown  fowl, 
yet  lays  an  egg  not  quite  one-third  less  than  that  of  the  emu, 
5 inches  in  length  by  3 in  width,  whilst  that  of  the  other  is 
5-^  in  length  by  3^  in  width ; in  the  North  Island  there 
are  two  varieties  of  the  kiwi,  one  rather  larger  than  the  other, 
and  of  a darker  color,  which  only  lays  one  egg;  the  other,  or 
common  reddish  one,  lays  two,  which  are  of  smaller  dimen- 
sions; these  birds  have  rudimentary  wings,  which  are  ter- 
minated by  a slender  claw  ; the  bill  is  long  and  slightly 
curved,  having  the  nostrils  at  the  extremity;  the  feathers, 
which  are  tipped  with  a kind  of  claw,  are  much  prized  in 
forming  cloaks,  only  worn  by  the  highest  chiefs.* 

The  kiwi  has  burrows,  and  deposits  its  eggs  in  them,  gene- 
rally' at  the  root  of  the  rata.  It  is  said  to  be  three  years 
before  they  are  hatched,  and  oftentimes  the  hole  is  so  grown 
up  with  roots,  that  the  young  bird  cannot  make  its  way  out, 

* Cloaks  made  from  the  feathers  of  the  kiwi  are  highly  prized.  I brought  a 
very  large  one  from  one  of  the  Wanganui  tribes,  as  a present  for  the  Queen. 
During  the  many  years  I have  been  in  New  Zealand,  I never  saw  so  fine  a one 
— they  are  extremely  rare. 


R R 


610 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


and  thus  perishes ; the  kiwi  parure  is  the  largest  kind,  and 
the  kiwi  Jioihoi  the  smallest ; it  is  a night  bird,  and  finds  its 
food  by  smell,  feeling  the  way  by  means  of  its  large  whiskers, 
inserting  its  bill  in  the  earth  in  search  of  worms  with  great 
celerity,  making  at  the  same  time  a snuffling  sound ; it  then 
appears  very  animated,  kicks  with  considerable  force,  and 
expresses  its  anger  by  a hissing  or  grunting  noise ; it  is  easily 
tamed,  the  cry  it  makes  is  very  similar  to  its  name,  from 
which  probably  it  was  derived ; the  kiwi  is  an  unsightly 
bird,  having  short  thick  legs,  with  very  strong  nails  ; it  has 
no  tail ; in  very  wet  weather  it  is  often  driven  out  of  the 
forest,  and  compelled  to  seek  the  plain  ; when  at  rest,  it 
supports  itself  upon  its  beak ; the  natives  always  tie  a feather 
or  two  of  this  bird  to  their  pawa , or  fish-hooks ; it  is  good 
eating,  and  tastes  more  like  tender  beef  than  a bird ; the 
principal  fleshy  parts  are  the  ribs  and  legs.  There  is  said 
to  be  another  bird  of  this  family  in  the  Middle  Island,  weigh- 
ing as  much  as  eighteen  pounds  ; it  is  so  strong  that  it  cannot 
be  held  with  one  hand,  and  if  the  captor  be  not  very  careful, 
it  will  escape,  as  my  informant  said,  by  shaking  itself  out  of 
its  feathers,  which  it  commonly  does  when  caught,  this  is 
probably  the  Roa. 

The  natives  speak  of  an  immense  bird  which  lived  on  the 
tops  of  the  mountains  of  the  Middle  Island,  and  was  called 
powakai;  this  is  alluded  to  in  several  of  their  traditions; 
they  also  talk  of  another  member  of  this  family,  which  they 
name  the  kiwi  papa  whenua,  this  is  described  as  having 
been  fully  seven  feet  high ; Rauparaha  told  me  he  had  eaten 
it  in  his  youth,  which  might  be  about  seventy  years  ago, 
and  when  that  Chief  died,  his  corpse  was  said  to  have  been 
ornamented  with  one  of  its  feathers. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that,  although  the  birds  of  the  Middle 
Island  are  essentially  the  same  with  those  of  the  north,  yet 
still  there  is  a difference ; they  vary  in  several  particulars, 
and  though  belonging  to  a colder  climate,  in  general  their 
colors  are  brighter  than  the  others  ; this  difference  is  the 
more  singular  from  the  narrowness  of  the  straits  which  divide 
the  two  islands,  and  perhaps  is  to  be  regarded  as  a proof 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


611 


that  the  severance  of  the  two  must  belong  to  a very  remote 
period. 

The  Fam.  Rallidce , is  rather  an  extensive  one,  though 
several  members  of  it  are  extinct.  The  largest  kind  is  the 
ocydromus  Australis , the  weka , or  wood  hen  of  the  settlers. 
The  breast  is  of  a slate  color,  the  back  brown,  and  speckled ; 
it  is  strongly  made,  and  about  the  size  of  a half- grown  fowl : 
it  is  very  abundant  in  the  Middle  Island,  and  the  southern 
part  of  the  North  Isle ; its  name  is  taken  from  its  cry. 

The  jpukeko , or  rauhara,  fporphyrio  melanotus,)  is  a fine 
bird,  about  the  size  of  a pullet;  it  has  long  red  legs  and  toes, 
with  a bill  and  protuberance  above  of  the  same  color,  some- 
what like  the  guinea-fowl,  the  back  is  black,  and  the  breast 
of  a bright  mazarine  blue,  the  under  feathers  of  the  tail 
are  pure  white,  forming  a fine  contrast  with  the  black  of  its 
short  tail,  which  has  always  a spasmodic  movement;  this 
bird  has  a strong  shrill  cry,  resembling  its  name,  flies  slowly 
and  heavily,  and  is  a great  thief,  making  much  havoc  in  the 
cultivations;  it  abounds  in  swamps  and  along  the  sides  of 
rivers,  the  flesh  is  dry  and  coarse,  seldom  eaten  by  the  natives, 
but  much  esteemed  by  Europeans,  who  say,  that  when  kept 
it  has  an  exquisite  flavor,  it  is  easily  domesticated. 

Of  this  family  is  the  takahe , the  notornis  mantellii  of  Owen, 
a large  heavy  bird  of  the  Middle  Island,  very  rare,  of  the 
size  of  a hen,  and  is  the  largest  known  rail  in  the  world, 
with  a short  thick  beak,  and  strong  legs,  the  back  is  black, 
and  its  neck  and  body  of  a dark  blue,  shaded  with  green  and 
gold  on  the  wings,  the  tail  is  scanty,  and  white  underneath, 
two  specimens  only  have  reached  this  country,  which  are  to 
be  seen  in  the  British  Museum.  A new  one  is  Radius 
Feather  stonily  a very  fine  bird. 

There  are  several  smaller  kinds  of  rails,  of  these  is  the 
pojpotai,  (r alius  assimilis3J  of  a ferruginous  color ; the  moe 
rild  radius  Rieffenbachii,  is  peculiar  to  the  Chatham  Isles, 
a fine  bird,  but  extremely  rare. 

Katatai,  a small  rail,  about  the  size  of  a sparrow,  but  of 
a very  delicate  shape ; it  is  of  a light  brown  color*  the  back 
spotted  with  black  and  white,  the  breast  of  a slate  color 

r r 2 


612 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


beak  bright  green,  eye  black,  with  a red  circle ; it  has  a very 
small  tail,  which  is  black  underneath,  with  white  bands ; the 
legs  are  of  a pale  green. 

The  moho  periru,  or  motarua,  a small  dark  brown  rail  of 
uniform  color,  with  red  legs,  black  eyes,  red  circle,  black  bill, 
small  tail,  black  underneath,  spotted  with  white,  the  breast 
and  front  edges  of  the  wings  are  of  a dark  bright  blue. 

Totoriwai,  a small  black  rail;  the  moho  is  also  a black 
bird,  formerly  very  abundant,  but  now  seldom  seen. 

Fam.  Tetraonidce — koitareke , or  kokoreke , koreke,  and  kou- 
tareke , (coturnix  novoe  Zealandice  J is  a small  quail,  with 
short  legs,  nearly  resembling  that  of  Australia,  in  its  general 
features ; it  is  extremely  rare,  and  all  but  extinct  in  the 
North  Island. 

In  the  fam.  Falconidoe,  is  the  kahu  (falco  Novoe  Zealandice 
vel  circus  GoldiiJ , a fine  large  hawk,  which  is  very  destructive 
to  poultry,  and  will  not  hesitate  to  pounce  on  eveu  a full- 
grown  hen,  the  wings  are  nearly  four  feet  across  when 
expanded,  but  the  body  of  this  rapacious  bird  is  very  small, 
being  dark  yellow,  spotted  with  brown,  and  the  breast  a 
lighter  color,  spotted. 

The  kaiaia , or  karewarewa,  kauaua , (Hieracidea).  This 
is  very  similar  to  the  English  sparrow-hawk;  it  has  a shrill 
cry,  which  is  regarded  as  a weather  omen. 

There  is  also  a night  hawk,  (Hieracidea  Novoe  Zealandice 
GoldiiJ  somewhat  similar  to  the  sparrow-hawk  in  plumage. 

Fam.  Strigidoe — koukou  or  ruru  {Athene  Novoe  Zelandice.) 
It  is  called  more  pork  by  the  settlers,  this  is  a small  owl,  and 
the  only  one  known  in  the  North  Island ; it  is  easily  killed 
with  a stick  in  the  day  time. 

{A.  albifrons,) — Wekou , only  found  in  the  Middle  Island; 
a third  has  been  found  by  Dr.  Haast,  and  after  him  is  called 
Btiix  Haastii. 

Fam.  Alcedinidce — kotare,  {halcyon  vagans).  It  closely 
resembles  the  English  kingfisher  in  plumage,  but,  if  anything, 
is  rather  inferior  to  it  in  beauty,  and  is  a third  larger. 

Fam.  Upupidce — huia,  ( Hetera  lochaj.  This  is  a beau- 
tiful bird,  with  small  wings,  about  the  size  of  the  jay,  of 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


613 


a bright  glossy  black,  with  four  large  tail  feathers,  tipped 
with  white,  which  have  a graceful  curve,  with  a small 
white  tuft  under  the  root  of  the  tail,  the  male  has  a long 
slender  bright  yellow  bill,  the  female  has  a thicker  one, 
the  eye  is  of  a leaden  color;  it  has  a little  yellow  fleshy 
lappet  on  each  side  of  the  head,  which  look  like  two  wafers 
stuck  on  the  cheeks,  the  legs  and  feet  are  long,  slender, 
and  of  a bright  yellow ; its  hop  is  very  singular,  almost 
like  that  of  the  kangaroo  ; the  skins  are  very  highly  prized 
as  articles  of  barter ; the  range  of  this  rare  bird  is  confined 
to  the  south  of  the  Ruahine  mountains,  in  the  North  Island, 
especially  on  the  Tararua  range,  the  natives  forward  the 
skins  to  the  north  carefully  packed  between  pieces  of  bark, 
and  receive  sharks'  teeth  in  return ; a good  skin  is  valued  at 
one  pound. 

The  following  are  honey-birds  : — 

Farm  Melli  phagidce — the  tui,  Ttoko,  ( Prosthemadera , JSfovce 
Scelandioe) . Cook  named  this  beautiful  and  lively  bird,  the 
parson  and  mocking  bird  ; it  acquired  the  first  name  from  its 
having  two  remarkable  tufts  of  small  white  feathers  on  the 
neck,  like  a pair  of  clergyman's  bands ; and  the  latter  from  its 
facility  in  imitating  sounds ; though  not  a bird  of  gaudy  colors, 
there  is  something  very  chaste  and  elegant  in  its  plumage,  a 
black  bronzed  hue,  with  delicate  white  hair  feathers  round  the 
neck ; it  is  a sweet  songster,  and  full  of  activity,  incessantly 
flying  up  and  down,  and  uttering  its  varied  and  joyous  notes ; 
in  the  spring  it  may  be  seen  amongst  the  yellow  kowai  trees, 
brushing  out  the  pollen  from  the  flowers  with  the  greatest 
rapidity ; when  tamed,  it  readily  imitates  every  kind  of  sound, 
and  soon  forms  an  attachment  to  any  one  who  notices  it,  so 
that  it  is  a general  favorite. 

The  tui  becomes  extremely  fat  in  winter,  when  it  is  caught 
in  great  numbers  by  snares  ; but  in  that  season  it  is  also 
taken  by  marking  its  place  of  roost  on  a frosty  night ; in  the 
morning  its  legs  and  wings  are  so  benumbed  with  cold,  that 
it  is  easily  shaken  from  its  perch,  which  it  has  not  strength 
to  leave  before  the  sun  warms  its  half-frozen  body;  this 
seems  to  prove  that  the  climate  has  become  colder  than  it 


614 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


was  formerly.  When  the  tui  becomes  so  extremely  fat  as  to 
be  uncomfortable  to  itself,  it  is  said  to  peck  its  breast,  and  thus 
cause  the  oil  to  exude,  which  completely  saturates  its  feathers, 
so  that  when  caught  it  is  found  covered  with  the  marks  of  its 
peckings,  and  thence  acquires  the  name  of  koko,  or  pecking. 
The  tui  is  said  to  breed  three  times  in  the  year,  beginning  in 
September,  or  early  spring,  when  it  lays  three  pure  white 
eggs  ; in  December  five ; and  in  March,  or  autumn,  six  or 
seven  ; it  takes  little  more  than  a fortnight  to  hatch ; the 
unfledged  bird  is  called  ay?/,  afterwards  a pikari,  and  when 
fledged  a jpurehe  ; but,  full-grown,  a tui , and  when  very  fat, 
a koko;  the  flesh  of  this  bird  is  considered  a very  great  dainty ; 
but  its  lively  song  is  far  sweeter  to  those  who  admire  melody, 
and  such  will  regret  that  this  will  not  save  it  from  the  Maori 
oven. 

The  kotihe  (joogonornis  cinctaj . This  beautiful  honey-bird 
has  a velvety  black  head  and  wings,  with  a tuft  of  white 
feathers  on  either  cheek  and  wing;  it  has  a bright  yellow 
circle  round  the  lower  part  of  the  neck  and  wings ; the  back 
and  tail  are  of  a yellowish  grey ; it  is  about  the  size  of  a bull- 
finch. The  male  is  much  larger  than  the  female,  which  has 
not  so  fine  a plumage ; its  legs  are  strong,  and  the  tail 
slightly  forked,  it  lays  four  eggs,  the  notes  are  pleasing, 
but  few,  which,  when  it  has  sung,  it  hops  away  to  another 
bush. 

The  korimako , kokorimako  and  komako  (antliornis  mela - 
nura).  This  bird  is  the  sweetest  songster  of  New  Zealand, 
and  sings  in  the  night  as  in  the  day,  but  is  not  dis- 
tinguished by  its  plumage,  which  is  of  a yellowish  olive, 
with  a dark  bluish  shade  on  each  side  of  the  head ; the  rest 
of  the  body  being  of  a dingy  yellow-green  color ; it  has  a 
long  forked  tail,  and  strong  wings ; the  legs  are  of  a puce 
color ; it  lays  seven  eggs,  spotted  with  blue,  upon  a brown 
ground ; the  male  is  larger,  and  its  plumage  rather  brighter, 
with  more  green  in  it  than  that  of  the  female ; it  is  also 
called  kojpara.  To  this  genus  belongs  the  anthornis  melano- 
cephcda  of  the  Chatham  Isles ; these  honey-birds  have  brush 
tongues,  hence  named  trichoglossi . 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


615 


Fam.  Luscinidoe.— The  matata , or  koroatito  (spenaeaeus  ? 
punctatus) , it  is  a small  dark  brown  bird,  with  a white  and 
brown  spotted  breast,  and  has  four  long  and  four  short  tail 
feathers,  similar  in  structure  to  those  of  the  emu  and  kiwi ; 
it  is  a swamp  bird,  flies  low,  and  for  a very  short  distance, 
amongst  the  rushes  and  fern,  with  a long  shrill  cry ; and  is 
easily  killed  with  a stick.  Formerly,  it  was  a sacred  bird, 
and  offered  in  sacrifice  when  a party  returned  unsuccessful 
from  the  war. 

Fam.  Troglodytinoe. — To  this  family  belong,  S.  Fulvus , 
Gerygone  igata,  G.  Flaviventris,  G.  Albofrontata , G.  Assimilis, 
Gerthiparus  Novoe  Sclandice , G.  Maculieaudus , P.  Etroica 
Macrocephala , P.  Eieffenbachii,  P.  Toitoi , P.  Longipes , P. 
Albifrons,  and  Anthus  Novce  Zealandice. 

Riro  riro,  the  wren.  This  most  diminutive  bird  is  of  a 
greyish  yellow  color,  and  very  tame.  I met  with  a blue- 
crested  wren  at  Waitara,  which  was  so  tame  as  to  be  caught 
in  the  hand.  The  cuckoo  lays  its  eggs  in  this  little  bird's 
nest. 

Fam.  Turdidce. — The  piopio  (tnrnagra  crassirostris) , a bird 
about  the  size  of  a thrush,  with  a short  thick  bill,  red  tail, 
yellow  breast,  and  brown  back,  it  is  a bird  of  passage  from 
the  south,  Piopio  wirunga  nga  tau  ho  Matatua  ie  waka,  the 
piopio  came  on  the  bow  of  the  Matatua , one  of  the  original 
canoes,  from  Hawaiki,  so  says  the  proverb,  it  feeds  upon 
grubs,  and  has  the  habits  of  the  woodpecker. 

Fam.  Muscicapidce. — Piwaka  waka,  tirakaraka,  the  fantailed 
fly- catcher,  a pretty  little  restless  lively  bird,  very  sociable, 
and  fond  of  displaying  its  beautiful  fan-tail,  it  has  one 
black  and  white  streak  under  the  neck,  coming  to  a point  in 
the  centre  of  the  throat ; its  wings  are  very  sharp  and  pointed, 
is  very  quick  and  expert  in  catching  flies,  and  a great  favo- 
rite, as  it  generally  follows  the  steps  of  man.  It  was  sacred 
to  Maui. 

Miromiro,  ( miro  albifrons.) — A little  black  and  white  bird, 
with  a large  head,  it  is  very  tame,  and  has  a short  melancholy 
song ; it  generally  flies  about  graves  and  solitary  bushes. 
The  miro  toitoi , (muscipeta  toitoi ,)  or  the  ngirungiru,  is  a bird 


616 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


not  larger  than  the  tom-tit ; its  plumage  is  black  and  white, 
having  a white  breast,  and  some  of  the  near  feathers  of  each 
wing  tinged  with  white. 

Fam.  Corvidae . — The  kokako,  or  New  Zealand  crow,  is 
about  the  size  of  a small  pullet,  with  long  legs,  and  remarkably 
short  wings,  its  eye  is  of  a lavender  color,  the  head  is  very 
small ; it  has  a strong  black  beak  a little  curved,  and  a 
small  brilliant  light-blue  flap  hanging  down  on  each  side  the 
ear ; it  is  a sly  bird,  very  thievish,  and  timid ; the  flesh  is 
bitter,  but  when  skinned  and  steeped  in  water  a short  time 
previous  to  cooking,  it  becomes  more  palatable. 

Fam.  Sturnidce. — Tieki , (creadion  carunculatus.)  This  is 
a beautiful  black  bird,  with  a chesnut  band  across  the  back 
and  wings  ; it  has  also  a fleshy  lappet  on  either  side  the  head; 
the  tieki  is  considered  a bird  of  omen,  if  one  flies  on  the  right 
side  it  is  a good  sign,  if  on  the  left  a bad  one. 

Aplonis  Zelandicus  and  A.  Obscurus.  Fam.  Fringittidoe. — 
Pihoihoi,  wioi , kataitai,  ( alauda , Novae  Zeal:)  This  little  bird 
is  very  similar  to  the  ground  lark,  but  has  no  song ; it  is  of 
a grey  color,  the  breast  white,  with  grey  spots,  makes  its  nest 
on  the  ground,  and  greatly  resembles  its  English  namesake. 

Fam.  P sittaeidoe.  has  seven  or  more  representatives.  The 
kaka  ( nestor  meridionalis) . Its  general  color  is  a dark  brown, 
with  a reddish  shade,  the  breast  is  also  red  and  brown, 
with  bright  red  feathers  under  the  wings,  the  bill  is  very 
large  and  curved ; the  cry  is  remarkably  strong  and  harsh, 
when  the  other  birds  hold  their  morning  concert,  the  kaka 
generally  puts  a stop  to  it  with  his  harsh  shrill  note,  when 
he  thinks  they  have  sung  enough,  it  has  a fine  black  eye, 
this  is  a large  bird,  easily  tamed,  and  taught  to  speak ; the 
natives  make  mokai  or  pets  of  them,  and  generally  use  them 
to  decoy  wild  ones ; this  bird  is  eaten,  but  is  very  dry, 
and,  excepting  the  breast,  rather  strongly  flavored;  it  makes 
its  nest  in  holes  of  trees,  and  lays  two,  four,  and  some- 
times seven  eggs ; generally,  three  of  these  birds  are  found 
in  the  same  hole,  a male  and  two  females ; and  their  nests 
are  so  close,  that  either  bird  can  cover  the  eggs  of  her  neigh- 
bour, and  thus  gives  her  leave  of  absence ; the  natives  have 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


617 


a saying,  that  the  ha, ha  never  alights  on  the  maire  tree ; one 
kind  has  a larger  bill,  this  is  called  haha  huripa : the  one 
with  a smaller  one  is  called  haha  motaraua ; some  hahas 
make  their  nests  in  the  soft  sand  cliffs;  these  are  lighter, 
the  back  and  wings  being  of  a dirty  cream  color,  and  the 
breast  of  a bright  red,  this  may  be  the  platycercus  auriceps, 
or  trichoglossus  aurifrons , horaho,  but  the  natives  call  it  an 
albino. 

Kea,  ( nestor  notabilis,)  frequents  the  alpine  solitudes  of  the 
Middle  Island,  its  plumage  is  red ; it  only  descends  in  severe 
winters. 

The  mo&t  remarkable  bird  of  this  family  is  the  hahapo,  or 
tarepo  (strigops  habroptilus J the  night  or  owl  parrot;  it  is 
nearly  as  large  as  a hen,  of  a light  green  and  yellow  color, 
banded  with  brown,  with  long  black  whiskers,  frequents 
mountains  and  precipices,  and  though  possessing  wings  sel- 
dom uses  them,  it  is  gregarious ; one  generally  keeps  guard, 
and  so  carefully,  that  it  can  never  be  approached  on  the  wind- 
ward side  ; in  appearance  it  resembles  the  owl ; the  natives 
say,  there  are  two  kinds,  one  of  which  is  as  large  as  the  hiwi  ; 
it  is  extremely  rare,  and  will  be  soon  extinct  in  the  North 
Island.  I have  only  seen  two  caught  there,  it  is  very  deli- 
cate eating,  the  flesh  being  white  like  that  of  a fowl ; this 
remarkable  bird  is  more  abundant  in  the  Middle  Island. 

The  haharihi , or  pouwaitere , (platycercus  PacificusJ  is  a 
pretty  light  green  paroquet,  with  a band  of  red  or  yellow  over 
the  upper  beak  and  under  the  throat.  This  elegant  little  bird 
is  about  the  size  of  a small  thrush ; it  flies  very  fast,  and  has  a 
quick  note  : it  is  excellent  eating;  the  one  with  red  on  the 
head  is  called  haharihi  matua ; the  other  with  yellow,  is  called 
haharihi  porere,  they  are  different  species. 

Fam.  Cnculidce. — The  hohoperoa,  hawehawea , hoehoea , 
(endynamys  taitensis).  This  is  a bird  of  passage,  one  of  the 
New  Zealand  cuckoos;  it  has  along  tail,  of  the  same  color  as 
the  sparrow-hawk,  and  altogether  pot  unlike  it ; the  body  is 
short  and  thick,  with  short  legs  and  strong  claws.  It  is  a sweet 
singing  bird,  but  is  only  heard  during  the  warmest  months 
of  the  year,  when  it  sings  all  the  night.  Its  appearance  is 


618 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


a token  for  the  planting  of  the  kumara,  and  its  departure,  that 
it  is  time  to  dig  them  up.  Some  have  an  idea,  that  this  bird 
hibernates  under  the  water.  The  Taupo  natives  think  that  it 
creeps  into  holes,  where  it  turns  into  a lizard,  and  loses  its 
feathers ; on  the  approach  of  summer,  it  crawls  out  of  its 
hole,  its  feathers  then  begin  to  grow,  the  tail  drops  off,  and  it 
again  becomes  a bird  ; in  its  lizard  form,  it  is  called  he  ngaha , 
but  in  Wanganui,  he  piri  rewa , or  tree  lizard.  The  natives 
say,  that  always  before  the  wind  is  about  to  blow  from  the 
south,  the  kohoperoa  ceases  to  sing,  and  does  not  commence 
again  till  the  west  wind  rises,  or  till  a breeze  springs  up  from 
the  north.  When  a child  is  deserted  by  its  parents,  it  is  said 
to  be  “ Te  parahaka  o te  koekoea,” — “ An  egg  left  in  another^ 
nest.” 

The  piwarauroa , ( chrysococyx  lucidus , cuculus  nitensj  is  the 
other  cuckoo,  which  is  also  a bird  of  passage.  Its  breast  is 
white,  the  feathers  being  fringed  with  green  and  gold ; the 
back  is  green,  gold,  and  bronze ; the  feathers  under  the  tail 
are  white,  spotted  with  brown.  It  has  a very  peculiar  shrill 
note,  but  when  first  heard  in  August  its  cry  is  feeble.  There 
is  a saying,  if  it  continues  to  cry  Tiui  kui,  it  will  be  a cold 
summer ; but  if  it  sings  witi  ora , witi  ora , it  will  be  a warm 
season.  These  two  birds  of  passage  are  said  to  divide  the 
year  between  New  Zealand  and  Hawaiki,  arriving  in  Sep- 
tember and  leaving  in  March.  The  smaller  cuckoo  lays  its 
eggs  in  the  nest  of  the  miro  miro. 

Fam.  Columhidoe.  — Kerim,  kukupa,  ( kuku  carpophaga, 
Novoe  Zeal :)  the  wood  pigeon.  This  is  a very  fine  large  bird, 
the  size  of  a duck  : the  upper  part  of  the  breast  is  green  and 
gold ; the  lower  a pure  white ; legs  and  bill  red.  It  is  a 
heavy  flying  bird,  and  very  stupid,  which  makes  it  an  easy 
prey  to  its  enemies.  If  two  birds  are  on  one  tree,  and  one 
be  shot,  the  other  seldom  flies  away.  Its  chief  food  is  the 
fruit  of  the  miro  when  in  season,  and  then  it  is  good  eating; 
at  other  times,  it  feeds  on  wild  cabbage,  and  in  spring  on  the 
young  leaves  of  the  kowai,  when  it  is  not  considered  whole- 
some. There  is  a saying,  the  pigeon  never  alights  on  the  rata 
tree.  I have  only  met  with  one  species  of  this  bird. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


619 


Fam.  Gharadridoe. — The  torea,  {hoematopus  picatus ,)  a 
black  shore  bird  with  red  legs  and  bill.  C.  obscurus ; G. 
frontalis.  The  liar  or  o,  a black  and  white  shore  gull,  seizes 
the  shell  fish  it  preys  on,  carries  it  up  in  the  air,  and 
then  drops  it,  in  order  to  break  the  shell  and  obtain  the 
food. 

Fam.  Ardeidce. — Matalcu  urepo , ( bataurus  melanotus.)  The 
bittern  is  very  generally  spread  over  the  whole  of  New  Zea- 
land ; it  is  of  a buff  color,  with  brown  spots,  and  lighter  under 
the  breast ; it  utters  three  hollow  sounds,  and  then  ceases  for 
a short  period  before  it  commences  again.  When  it  stands 
at  rest  or  sleeps,  it  elevates  its  bill  to  the  heavens,  which 
gives  it  a very  singular  appearance. 

The  mataku  ( ardea  mataku)  is  a bright  ash  color.  The 
top  of  the  head  is  covered  with  slight  bristles,  and  the  back  of 
the  skull  is  of  a red  color,  perfectly  bald ; its  neck  and  legs 
are  long.  The  female  lays  two  eggs  of  a pale  blue  color, 
about  the  size  of  a turkey's  egg;  it  is  a very  shy  bird,  and 
seldom  seen ; flies  gracefully,  with  its  long  legs  stretched  out 
like  a tail. 

Kotuku , ( ardea  flavirostris ,)  the  white  crane ; a beautiful 
but  rare  bird;  it  has  a yellow  bill,  and  dark  green  legs. 
Though  sufficiently  abundant  in  the  Southern  Island,  it  is 
seldom  seen  in  the  Northern,  so  that  there  is  a saying,  hotahi 
ano  te  rerenga  o te  kotuku , that  is,  a man  only  sees  the  white 
crane  once  in  his  lifetime.  It  is  more  abundant  in  the  Middle 
Island. 

Fam.  Scolopacidoe. — Tarapunga , ( himantopus  Novce  Zeal :) 
a white-breasted  bird,  wings,  back,  and  head  black,  red  bill 
slightly  curved  upwards,  with  long  red  legs ; it  is  found  on 
the  Taupo  lake,  but  not  further  north. 

Fam.  Anatidce. — Parer  a,  turuki,  [anas  superciliosa ,)  the 
duck,  very  similar  to  the  wild  duck  of  England.  Those  in 
the  interior  appear  to  be  of  a larger  kind. 

Putangitangi , ( casarca  rariegata,)  the  paradise  duck ; this 
fine  bird  is  confined  to  the  southern  part  of  the  Northern 
Island,  but  is  very  abundant  in  the  Middle  Island ; the  colors 
of  this  bird  are  very  distinct,  the  breast  white,  and  the  wings 


620 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


of  a yellowish  red,  or  dark  orange,  with  partly  colored  back; 
it  is  easily  tamed,  and  is  almost  too  large  to  be  called  a duck, 
and  too  small  for  a goose. 

Wio,  ( hymenolaimus  malacorynchus,)  the  blue  duck,  is  found 
abundantly  in  the  mountain  streams  of  the  south  part  of  the 
North  Island,  and  in  the  Middle ; it  takes  its  name  from  its 
cry.  This  bird  has  a remarkable  membrane  attached  to  its 
bill ; it  is  highly  prized  by  the  natives  ; climbs  up  rocks  by 
means  of  the  joints  of  its  wings,  which  are  bare  of  feathers, 
and  horny,  and  uses  its  short  strong  tail  as  a support. 

Fam.  Colymhidce , a small  dab  chick,  ( Podiceps  rufipedus ,) 
common  in  lakes,  and  a beautiful  grebe. 

Fam.  Alcidce. — Four  kinds  have  been  met  with  in  New 
Zealand,  Aptenodytes , Pennantii,  Fudyptes , Padiyrynchus. 

For  or  a (spheniscus  minor,)  the  small  green  and  white 
penguin,  formerly  very  abundant;  it  lays  two  white  eggs 
in  the  crevices  of  rocks  and  holes  near  the  sea-shore. 

Hoiho  (eudyptes  antipodes) . — This  penguin  is  double  the 
size  of  the  former,  the  back  is  dark  brown,  and  the  breast 
white  ; it  is  very  rarely  seen  in  the  Northern  Island. 

Fam.  Procellaridce. — The  Petrels  are  a numerous  family. 
Titi,  ( pelecanoides  urinatrix,)  a dark  grey  sea  bird,  with 
white  breast,  which  goes  inland  at  sun-set,  and  flies  about 
in  the  dusk  for  a short  time,  with  great  noise ; it  lays  one 
egg  in  the  holes  of  rocks,  and  is  very  fat.  It  is  supposed  to 
deposit  a store  of  food  for  its  young  when  hatched,  and  then 
to  abandon  it;  hence  the  saying,  “He  manu  wangainga  tahi,,} 
— “ A bird  that  only  feeds  its  young  once.”  In  addition  to 
this,  Puffinns  Assimilis,  Procellaria  gig  ant  ea,  P.  JEquinodia  Us, 
P.  Parkensoni,  P.  Glacialo'ides,  P.  Capensis , P.  Gookii,  P.  Gama, 
P.  Ariel,  P.  Gerulia,  Prionvitatus. 

Toroa  (diomedea  exulans). — The  albatross  is  found  in  the 
New  Zealand  seas ; the  feathers  are  highly  prized  by  the 
natives  as  ornaments,  especially  the  under  wing  feathers, 
which  are  pure  white,  and  the  down,  tufts  of  which  are  worn 
in  the  lobe  of  the  ear.  The  wing  bones  also  are  used  as  neck 
and  ear  ornaments.  D.  Fuliginosa. 

Fam.  Pelecanidce.—  Kauwau  or  Jcaruhiruhi \ (graculus  car- 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


621 


b aides,)  a black,  or  black  and  white  bird,  abounding  in  rivers 
and  harbours.  The  cormorants  are  sociable  birds,  and  build 
their  nests  in  great  numbers  on  the  same  tree,  overhanging 
the  water ; the  smell  of  one  of  these  colonies  is  almost  in- 
supportable. G.  Girrhatus , G.  Melanoleucus,  G.  Varius, 
G.  Punctatus , G.  Brevirostris , G.  Chalconotus,  and  G.  Stido- 
cephalus. 

Fam.  Sylviadce  Erythaca. — The  totara,  a slate-colored 
bird,  with  a few  little  white  feathers  near  the  bill,  the  New 
Zealand  robin,  a very  grave  but  social  bird,  always  following 
the  steps  of  man,  and  commonly  known  by  the  name  of 
“ The  Doctor/’ 

There  are  several  birds  omitted  in  this  list,  which  are  not 
classed,  but  the  most  interesting  are  here  given. 

Fam.  Scincidce. — New  Zealand  formerly  possessed  many 
species  of  lizards,  and  if  native  accounts  may  be  depended 
upon,  many  of  these  were  of  very  large  size ; even  when 
Europeans  first  visited  the  islands,  they  were  far  more  nu- 
merous than  they  now  are  ; their  decrease  may  be  attributed 
to  the  frequent  fires,  and  introduction  of  the  cat,  which 
greedily  preys  upon  them ; they  are  therefore  now,  compa- 
ratively speaking,  seldom  seen.  The  chief  lizard  still  existing 
is  the  Tuatara , (tiliqua  Zealandica,  vel  Hatteria  jpundata,)  the 
guana;  it  is  about  eighteen  inches  long;  the  head  is  large,  with 
a fine  benevolent  eye ; it  has  a row  of  white  serrated  points 
on  the  back,  with  similar  dark  ones  on  the  tail ; the  teeth  are 
rounded,  and  the  tongue  triangular  ; its  toes  are  slender ; it 
lays  on  its  back  when  basking  in  the  sun,  and  burrows  ; it  is 
now  only  found  on  the  small  islands  in  Cook’s  Straits,  or  on 
the  eastern  coast  of  the  North  Island ; it  is  of  a dark  brown 
color,  intermingled  with  yellow.  The  natives  have  a great 
horror  of  it,  although  it  is  perfectly  harmless. 

Fam.  Gechotidce . — Kakarihi  ( naultinus  elegans)  is  a beau- 
tiful bright  green  lizard,  about  eight  inches  long  ; it  has  the 
power  of  contracting  or  dilating  the  pupil  of  its  eye.  The 
natives  are  much  alarmed  at  the  sight  of  it,  and  especially  if 
they  should  hear  it  laugh,  (so  they  call  the  noise  it  makes,) 
which  they  say  is  a sure  sign  of  death  to  the  person  who 


622 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


hears  it.  The  natives  imagine  that  all  diseases  are  caused 
by  this  lizard  crawling  down  their  throats,  when  they  are 
asleep.  The  male  is  perfectly  green  ; the  female  has  a 
longitudinal  line  of  white  spots  running  down  the  lower 
part  of  each  side.  N.  Pcicificus,  N.  Punctatus  mokopapa, 
has  suckers  attached  to  its  feet.  Fam.  Agamidce,  Hatteria 
Punctata. 

There  are  several  other  kinds  of  lizards,  one  is  beautifully 
spotted  and  of  a black  velvet  color ; another  is  of  a flesh  color 
under  the  neck  and  belly,  and  dark  brown  on  the  back.* 

Fam.  Hydrides,  ( pelamys  bicolor ),  found  from  eighteen  to 
twenty-four  inches  long,  of  a dirty  green  and  white  color. 

Fam.  Batrachice , (ranee) . — Until  lately  the  frog  was  not 
supposed  to  be  in  New  Zealand,  although  Polack  stated 
he  could  not  sleep  for  the  noise  of  their  croaking,  no  other 
traveller  has  met  with  such  annoyance,  although  many  have 
traversed  the  country  far  more  frequently  and  entirely  than 
he  ever  did,  without  even  seeing  anything  of  them.  The 
discovery  of  the  frog  in  New  Zealand  was  reserved  for  the 
gold-diggers  at  Coromandel  Harbour,  where,  in  1852,  three 
small  ones  were  found  in  their  pits  ; and  afterwards,  I heard 
that  one  had  occasionally  been  turned  up  by  the  plough  in 
the  vicinity  of  Auckland.  With  these  exceptions,  I have  not 
seen  any,  or  heard  of  others  seeing  them  ; they  must  be 
extremely  rare,  and  had  not  I found  from  the  natives  that 
there  is  a large  frog  on  the  island  of  Mana,  I should  have 
been  inclined  to  think  those  at  Coromandel  had  been  acci- 
dentally imported  from  Sydney.  The  natives  describe  a large 
frog,  which  they  call  moko  mokai , a maru  te  ware  aitu , as 
having  once  been  very  abundant  on  that  island ; they  say  it 
was  as  large  as  a small  pullet,  and  in  the  tadpole  state  more 
than  a foot  long  ; they  also  affirmed  there  was  a smaller  one 
found  in  the  same  locality ; the  existence  of  the  bull-frog  at 
present  only  rests  on  their  report.  Ranapipiens. 

* Black  lizards,  with  hair  or  down  on  them,  and  about  four  feet  long,  are 
said  to  abound  in  the  green  stone  lake.  A man  named  Hawkins,  who  lived  in 
that  part  of  the  island  for  many  years,  is  said  to  have  kept  one  of  these  lizards, 
w hich  he  fastened  with  a dog  chain  ; they  are  amphibious. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


623 


I have  twice  seen  a reptile  about  double  the  size  of  an 
English  toad,  the  back  was  serrated  and  of  a dirty  yellow, 
but  with  a smooth  skin  like  that  of  the  frog,  the  head  and 
termination  of  back  nearly  the  same  in  shape,  it  did  not  hop 
but  ran ; as  it  was  near  a bush  I had  but  a transient  view  of 
it,  but  sufficiently  clear  to  make  the  above  observations ; a 
similar  reptile  was  stated  to  have  been  found  in  the  centre  of 
a stone. 

No  snakes  have  ever  been  found,  although  there  are  reports 
of  their  having  been  introduced  by  the  Sydney  shipping. 
Many  of  the  earth-worms  are  almost  like  them  in  size,  being 
considerably  more  than  a foot  long,  and  some  even  more 
than  a yard,  these  were  formerly  eaten,  and  esteemed  very 
good  : this  was  the  case  with  the  toke  tipa,  a very  long  large 
worm,  which  feeds  on  roots,  there  is  a saying,  that  the  reka, 
or  sweetness,  of  this  worm  remained  in  the  mouth  for  two  days 
after  it  was  eaten.  A long  olive  worm  is  found  in  mud  pools. 

The  Ichthyology  of  the  New  Zealand  seas  forms  a page  of 
natural  history,  which  hitherto  has  been  greatly  neglected ; 
the  two  Forster’s — father  and  son — who  accompanied  Cap- 
tain Cook  in  his  second  voyage,  were  the  first  who  paid  any 
attention  to  it.  More  recent  travellers  have  added  but  little. 
The  variety  and  abundance  of  our  fish  is  very  great ; many 
kinds,  however,  still  remain  un described  ; the  natives  furnish 
a long  list  of  names,  it  is  however  impossible  to  form  correct 
ideas  of  them  from  such  accounts ; we  are  solely  indebted  to 
Eichardson,  and  especially  Dr.  Gray,  for  the  best  classification 
which  has  yet  been  made. 

Of  the  Fam.  Percoidce , eleven  species  are  given  of  these ; 
the  one  which  is  most  generally  known  is  the  Centopristes 
trutta.  The  Kahawai,  this  is  one  of  the  most  abundant,  and 
is  called  the  mackerel  by  the  settlers. 

The  Tawa  tawa  is  the  same  size  as  the  Kahawai , or  mack- 
erel, which  it  resembles  in  color  and  form.  There  is  a saying 
of  this  fish,  ce  Me  te  kiri  tawa  tawa  ka  takoto  o te  tangata  nei,” 
— ■“  As  the  skin  of  the  tawa  tawa  when  caught,  so  is  the  skin 
of  the  man  when  slain/’ 

Polyprion  cernuum,  wreck-fish,  or  Jew-fish. 


624 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


Of  the  Fam.  Cottoidece,  there  are  six  enumerated,  of  these 
the  Gurnard  ( kumu-kumu ) is  most  common,  and  the  Trigla 
Volitans  ( korama ) the  most  beautiful. 

Of  the  Fam.  Scioenoidece , the  Latrisciliaris  moki  and  mohiki, 
it  is  distinguished  by  a triangular  black  patch  on  each  side  of 
the  shoulder,  and  is  one  of  the  best  of  the  New  Zealand  fish. 

Of  the  Fam.  Mugiloidece,  Mugil  Fosteri,  ( kanae ,)  this  is  a 
delicious  fish,  it  frequents  the  mouths  of  rivers,  but  it  is  not 
usual  to  find  it  beyond  the  influence  of  the  tide.  An  excep- 
tion, however,  occurs  in  the  Waikato,  where  it  is  found  in 
the  Wangape,  a lake  nearly  sixty  miles  up  that  river,  though 
it  is  there  in  great  abundance,  it  is  not  seen  in  the  Waikato 
itself,  hence  the  natives  have  the  idea  that  it  does  not  enter 
the  lake  by  the  river,  but  by  a subterranean  passage  from 
the  sea. 

Of  the  Fam.  Fsocidce  may  be  noticed  the  Maroro,  or  flying 
fish,  ( exocetus  exulans).  This  singular  fish  in  New  Zealand 
attains  the  length  of  eighteen  inches. 

The  Fam.  Glupeadicce  is  represented  by  the  Aua,  herring, 
which  is  plentiful  in  all  the  tidal  rivers,  and  may  be  taken  to 
any  extent. 

Fam.  Gadioidece  contains  the  Warehou  and  the  Hajpuku , 
two  of  the  best  of  the  New  Zealand  fish.  The  latter  fre- 
quently attains  a great  size,  and  is  often  caught  weighing 
more  than  50  lbs. ; both  this  and  the  Warehou  are  excellent 
fish  for  curing,  the  latter  is  abundant  on  our  rocky  coasts. 
The  Hako  also  belongs  to  this  family. 

Fam.  Plectognathi. — The  Pakirikiri , ( balistes ,)  file  fish,  is 
distinguished  by  two  strong  spines  at  the  commencement  of 
the  dorsal  fin,  in  shape  like  the  letter  V,  both  fronting  the 
head,  and  standing  out  from  the  fin,  these  are  elevated  at 
pleasure,  some  fish  have  only  one.  The  Pakirikiri  is  abundant 
in  the  Bay  of  Islands. 

Fam.  Pleuronectidce. — The  Platessa}  sole,  is  found  in  New 
Zealand,  but  is  seldom  taken,  it  appears  to  be  identical  with 
the  European  one. 

The  Rhrombus  Plebeus,  ( jpatiki ,)  or  flat  fish,  is  speared  by 
torch-light.  The  largest  are  caught  near  the  mouth  of  rivers, 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


625 


where  it  attains  a length  of  eight  or  ten  inches,  with  a breadth 
of  six  or  seven ; as  it  ascends  the  rivers  it  gradually  diminishes 
in  size,  until  at  a distance  of  two  hundred  miles  up  the  Wan- 
ganui, it  is  not  more  than  two  inches  long,  by  one-and-a-half 
broad. 

The  Dory  also  belongs  to  New  Zealand,  but  is  very  rarely 
captured. 

The  Koiro,  conger  eel,  (fam.  anguilliformes ,)  attains  a 
length  of  about  five  feet,  it  is  much  esteemed  by  the  natives. 

The  Fam.  Lophobranchii  contains  several  varieties  of  the 
pipe  fish,  the  most  remarkable  of  these  is  the  Hippocampus, 
which  is  frequently  met  with,  and  attains  a length  of  ten, 
and  sometimes  even  fifteen  inches. 

The  Para,  (fam.  tcenioides,)  is  a long  narrow  fish,  shaped 
like  a broad  sword,  from  three  to  five  feet  long,  this  is  never 
taken  by  the  seine  or  hook  ; it  is  only  obtained  after  a sharp 
frost,  being  then  drifted  on  the  shore  ; it  most  probably 
swims  near  the  surface,  and  is  thus  so  benumbed  as  to  be 
unable  to  resist  the  force  of  the  tide  ; the  natives  early  in 
the  morning  visit  the  shores,  and  frequently  obtain  a con- 
siderable number  of  them. 

A large  fish,  most  probably  a Lophotes  (Matawa  ?)  rib- 
bon fish,  thrown  up  on  the  Nelson  coast,  was  described 
by  Mr.  Travers  as  having  a small  head  only  ten  inches  in 
length,  and  a body  fifteen  feet  long  tapering  to  the  tail,  its 
greatest  thickness  being  but  four  inches,  having  only  one 
dorsal  fin  extending  its  entire  length,  and  no  caudal  one, 
but  terminating  in  a point ; it  had  large  spines  on  the  back 
apparently  hollow,  at  intervals  below  them  six  air  chambers 
about  one-third  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  from  the  lower  lip 
were  bright  red  barbules  sixteen  inches  long  and  rigid. 

Of  the  Fam.  Plectognathi  there  are  three  species  : Tetraodon 
Hamiltoni,  the  Monacanthus  parika,  and  the  Diadona  globulas. 
Kopuawai,  Koputaratara,  Papati  and  Totara,  all  these  are 
descriptive  names,  implying  that  it  is  covered  with  sharp 
spines,  and  is  inflated ; this  singular  fish  is  frequently  cast  up 
on  the  shore,  and  sometimes  of  a large  size. 

Fam.  Sguamipennes,  Chcetodon,  ( Arara ) ; its  dorsal,  ventral, 


626 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


and  caudal  fins,  are  covered  with  scales,  which  gives  it  an 
ancient  type  or  appearance,  a scaleless  plate  over  the  fore- 
head ; length  two  feet,  a flat  fish,  its  greatest  thickness  being 
one-and-three-quarters  of  an  inch. 

Of  the  Fam.  Scomberoides  is  the  Puhaio,  a fine  fish,  found 
in  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound,  it  is  black  and  red;  there  is  a 
saying,  if  this  fish  be  taken,  the  Hapuku  is  then  sure  to  be 
caught. 

Fam.  Esocidce  Hemiramphus  marginatus , guard-fish,  heihe , 
remarkable  from  its  having  a projection  of  the  lower  jaw  one 
fifth  of  its  entire  length,  which  is  from  eight  to  ten  inches ; 
it  is  found  in  great  abundance  in  the  northern  extremity  of 
New  Zealand,  as  well  as  in  Australia,  and  is  partially  trans- 
parent like  the  smelt,  which  it  also  slightlyresembles  in  flavor. 

Of  the  Fam.  Chimoeridce , is  that  singular  fish  the  Gallor- 
hynchus  antarcticus,  ( Repe  repe,)  or  elephant  fish,  which  at- 
tains a size  of  fully  two  feet ; this  is  found  in  Cook's  Straits. 

Fam.  Garcharice  (Mango  ururoa).  The  sharks  of  this  family 
attain  a considerable  size,  and  many  fatal  accidents  are 
occasioned  by  them  ; the  great  flat  triangular  teeth  belong- 
ing to  the  larger  ones  are  highly  prized  by  the  natives,  who 
set  an  extraordinary  value  on  them  as  ear  ornaments,  which  are 
handed  down  from  parent  to  child  as  most  valuable  heirlooms. 

Zygcena , (mangepare) , hammer-headed  shark,  a very  dan- 
gerous fish,  and  held  in  great  dread  by  the  natives. 

Fam.  Cestracionidce , represented  by  the  Tuatini,  whose 
teeth  are  set  in  blocks  of  half-a-dozen  each,  beginning  with 
the  largest  and  decreasing  in  size  to  the  least,*  it  is  probable 
that  the  Gestracion  Philippi  is  also  a visitor  of  the  New  Zea- 
land seas. 

Of  the  Fam.  Spinaces  is  the  Acanthias  mactdatus. 

Fam.  Squatinorajce,  (Papaki.) — This  extraordinary-looking 
fish  abounds  on  the  New  Zealand  shores,  it  is  very  repulsive 
in  its  appearance,  and  has  little  claim  to  the  title  of  angel 
fish  ; the  natives,  however,  eat  it,  drying  it  the  same  as  the 
shark. 

* The  teeth  of  the  tuatini  are  identical  with  those  figured  in  Part  27,  Fig. 
13,  Buckland’s  Bridgewater  Treatise. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


627 


Fam.  Raioe  Raid  nasuta,  (whai,)  the  rays  attain  a very  large 
size,  being  often  several  feet  in  diameter ; the  stingy  ray, 
so  called  from  its  having  a barbed  spear  beneath  the  tail, 
with  which  it  inflicts  very  severe  wounds,  often  proving  fatal ; 
it  abounds  in  all  the  shallow  bays. 

Fam.  Myliob  abides  has  the  Myliobatatis,  Nieu  hofii , (Raia 
macro  cephala , Ranks,)  which  is  a variety  of  the  same  order 
belonging  to  the  New  Zealand  seas. 

Fam.  Cyclostomi  has  the  Tuere , ( Heptatrema  domberyii,) 
found  in  Dusky  Bay,  and  also  in  Cook's  Straits,  it  is  about 
two  feet  long,  has  several  small  feelers  attached  to  the  head, 
and  a broad  flat  tail,  the  color  is  dark  brown,  and  the  body 
of  uniform  thickness ; it  is  known  as  the  mud  eel,  and  is 
remarkable  for  its  power  of  emitting  slime  to  such  an  extent 
as  completely  to  envelop  it. 

Fam.  Gyclopeterus  is  a small  fish  which  has  two  rows  of 
suckers  along  the*  entire  length  of  the  belly,  by  which  it  can 
attach  itself  to  rocks,  and  avoid  being  carried  away  by  the 
force  of  the  waves  ; it  is  two  inches  long,  of  a beautiful 
silvery  color,  and  is  often  thrown  up  on  the  shores  in  im- 
mense numbers. 

Fam.  Petromyzidce,  (. Pihapiharau ,)  the  Lamprey,  which  is 
found  in  most  of  the  rivers  to  the  south. 

Such  is  a brief  list  of  the  fish  of  the  New  Zealand  seas  which 
have  been  classed;  there  are,  however,  many  others  remaining 
to  be  so,  at  present  only  known  from  native  account;  of  such 
is  the  Tarau,  a ganoid  fish,  two-and-a-half  feet  long,  found 
among  the  rocks  at  Taranaki,  where  it  lays  concealed ; the 
natives  speak  of  it  as  a very  rich  oily  fish,  to  obtain  it  they 
go  into  the  water  breast  deep,  and  place  a basket  at  one  end 
of  the  hole  between  two  rocks,  where  it  is  known  to  resort, 
whilst  another  drives  it  in  by  poking  it  out  of  its  lair ; it  will 
not  take  the  hook,  nor  can  it  be  caught  by  the  net ; this  fish 
has  only  pectoral  fins,  and  a very  small  caudal  one,  the  scales 
are  large  and  thick,  they  are  disposed  in  plates,  those  on  the 
head  radiating  from  a centre  one,  the  natives  describe  the 
scales  as  being  placed  like  those  of  the  lizard,  the  eyes  are 
small ; this  description  is  corroborated  by  a gentleman  who 

s s 2 


628 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


saw  one  on  the  beach,  but  unfortunately  did  not  preserve  it. 
The  fish  appears  to  be  abundant  in  certain  rocky  places,  and 
is  well  known  to  the  natives. 

Also  the  Kanainai , of  the  same  size,  but  with  a much 
larger  head,  and  long  narrow  body,  very  small  eyes,  which 
are  indistinct,  being  covered  with  a skin,  a large  mouth, 
only  pectoral  fins,  which  are  white  tipped  with  black,  and  a 
small  caudal  one. 

The  Hoha  is  a fish  with  thick  lips  and  very  prominent  eyes, 
small  scales,  having  long  dorsal  and  ventral  fins,  in  addition 
to  its  pectoral  and  caudal  ones,  it  is  a foot  long,  and  is  found 
in  Queen  Charlotte^s  Sound. 

The  Bari , a fish  often  found  eight  feet  long,  the  body  is 
large  and  tapers  suddenly  into  a narrow  tail,  which  is  sur- 
rounded by  a fin  above  and  below,  as  that  of  the  eel,  without 
having  any  separate  caudal  one,  the  eye  is  large,  the  upper 
part  of  the  head  and  back  covered  with  spots,  the  lips  are 
thick,  from  the  lower  one  are  four  barbules,  the  fins  red. 

The  Ngehe  is  a rock  fish,  curiously  spotted,  white  and 
brown. 


CHCETODON,  ARARA. 


BOULDER  BANK,  NELSON. 


CHAPTER  XXXY. 


NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 


(continued.) 


New  Zealand  is  neither  destitute  in  the  variety  of  its  Molluscs, 
nor  in  the  size  of  their  shells  or  the  beauty  of  their  color, 
many  of  which  will  bear  comparison  with  those  of  warmer 
seas,  this  is  especially  the  case  with  the  shells  of  the  northern 
termination  of  the  islands,  where  they  partake  much  of  a 
tropical  character ; thus  the  Triton  variegatum,  ( Pntetere, ) 
the  ancient  Maori  trumpet,  is  found  at  the  North  Cape,  and 
although  in  size  much  less  than  those  of  New  Caledonia  and 
the  Fiji  Islands,  is  still  a fine  shell,  from  eight  to  ten  inches 
in  length,  but  the  Dolium  variegatum , also  obtained  at  the 
Cape,  quite  equals  that  of  New  Caledonia,  both  in  size 
and  beauty.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Cyprea  Macu- 
lata  of  Maketu  in  the  Bay  of  Plenty,  which  is  little  inferior 


630 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


to  those  found  throughout  the  Pacific.  The  jointed  coral  of 
Tolaga  Bay  likewise  corresponds  with  that  of  the  Fiji.  There 
is  also  an  evident  affinity  between  many  of  the  New  Zealand 
shells  and  those  of  Australia,,  and  even  of  India  and  China. 

The  Scalaria  pretiosa  and  Strombus  Troglodytes  may  be 
instanced  as  examples,  the  latter  being  nearly  allied  to  the 
Fusus  GoluSj  Ceylon,  and  the  former,  very  similar  to  the 
Chinese  member  of  that  family,  a beautiful  chain  of  connec- 
tion may  thus  be  traced,  which  marks  most  clearly  the 
general  unity  of  the  whole. 

The  fossil  shells  of  New  Zealand,  with  few  exceptions,  are 
identical  with  its  living  ones,  as  the  Rotella  vestiaria  ; some 
of  them  are  much  larger  than  those  still  in  existence;  this 
is  the  case  with  an  immense  cardium  cockle,  and  some  be- 
long to  families  which  are  now  altogether  extinct,  as  a fine 
pearl  clam,  found  on  the  Waitotara  coast,  and  an  immense 
Ostrea,  oyster,  shaped  like  the  sole  of  a man’s  shoe  and  of 
the  same  size,  but  much  thicker.  Two  families  of  shells  may 
be  said  to  be  peculiar  to  New  Zealand,  the  Struthiolaria , 
( Takai  or  Totorere)  and  the  Amphibola  avellana  ( Pupukari - 
kawa).  Some  few  shells  appear  to  be  identical  with  existing 
ones  in  Britain,  of  these  is  the  well-known  little  Gyprea?  fami- 
liar to  us  as  the  blackamoor's  tooth.  New  Zealand  is  rich  in 
the  allied  families,  Turbinidoe  and  Trochidoe  ; of  the  former 
may  be  instanced  the  Trochus  Imperialis,  ( Ngaruru ,)  which 
attains  the  great  size  of  four  inches  diameter,  and  more 
than  two  in  height.  The  Trochus  Elenchus  Iris,  (Til hi  Pu 
Taranaki ,)  is  a beautiful  shell,  and  frequently  worn  as  an 
ornament.  Ziziphinus  Tigris  ineni,  commonly  called  the 
partridge  trochus  of  the  Bay  of  Islands,  where  also  is  found 
the  strawberry  trochus,  of  a deep  pink  with  black  spots. 
There  are  fully  sixty  species  of  the  trochus  in  these  Isles, 
and  many  of  them  most  curious  and  beautiful.  Nearly  one 
hundred  species  of  land  and  water  shells  are  already  deter- 
mined, and  are  all  peculiar. 

The  Fam.  Patellidce  is  a numerous  one,  some  are  of  large 
size,  the  sessile  ones  are  curious,  as  well  as  those  with  an  aper- 
ture at  the  apex ; one  of  the  smallest  and  most  delicately 


SAMUEL  MARSDEN. 


631 


beautiful,  is  a bright  green  one  found  in  Wellington  Harbour, 
having  concentric  circles  of  lines,  commencing  from  the  peak 
of  the  shell  and  reaching  its  base. 

Fam.  Haliotidce.  — Several  varieties  of  this  beautiful  shell 
are  very  generally  distributed  throughout  Hew  Zealand. 
The  Haliotis  Pawa  is  little  inferior  either  in  size  or  splen- 
dour to  those  of  the  tropics,  the  finest  have  now  become  an 
article  of  export  for  that  newly-acquired  art  of  lacquering 
brought  from  Japan.  The  natives  likewise  greatly  prize 
them  for  fish-hooks  and  eyes  for  their  carved  figures.  They 
also  eat  the  fish  alive  as  we  do  the  oyster,  and  likewise  dry  it 
for  winter  consumption,  but  it  is  tough  and  tasteless ; it  might, 
perhaps,  be  rendered  more  palatable  by  better  cooks. 

Of  the  Fam.  Janthinidce,  three  kinds  are  thrown  up  on 
our  shores,  these  beautiful  blue  deep  sea  helices  are  by  no 
means  uncommon.  The  Janthina  Fragilis  is  large,  flattened 
above  and  white,  the  lower  part  being  light  purple  or  blue. 
The  J.  Communis , in  form  resembles  a paludina,  being  more 
pyramidical  and  of  a intense  blue,  delicately  shaded,  with  a 
slight  periostracum.  The  third  variety,  J . Exigua , is  nearly 
of  the  same  form,  but  the  shell  is  smooth  and  of  a lighter 
color.  The  whalers  state  they  find  myriads  of  this  sin- 
gular little  family  amongst  what  they  call  the  slick  of  the 
whale,  or  the  oil  which  escapes  in  cutting  up  the  fish,  it  is 
probable,  therefore,  that  it  is  not  altogether  a plant  eater,  as 
Lamarck  conjectured  ; nature  provides  the  Janthina  with  the 
means  of  constructing  a raft  of  air  bubbles,  that  in  the  same 
way  the  land  helices  crawl  along  the  ground,  this  marine 
one  may  skim  along  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  and  there  meet 
with  its  proper  nourishment. 

Fam.  Crepedulidce. — The  slipper  shell,  very  common  both 
in  Hew  Zealand  and  Australia,  some  attain  a considerable 
size,  one  is  round  and  covered  with  a thick  epidermis. 
One  of  the  most  delicate  and  beautiful  of  our  shells  is  the 
Argonauta  Hodosoe,  muheke,  paper  nautilus  ; this  is  generally 
found  after  storms  on  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Great  Barrier, 
Mayor,  and  other  islands  in  that  part ; smaller  ones  are 
occasionally  found  at  the  entrance  of  Cook's  Straits.  The 


632 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


Parmaphorus,  Rori,  is  a large  black  slug,  with  a shield-like 
shell  on  its  back,  it  is  abundant  on  the  coast  of  Taranaki, 
where  it  is  eaten  the  same  as  the  Pawa.  There  is  also  a 
similar  slug  found  in  the  same  locality,  but  without  any  shell ; 
the  natives  describe  them  as  being  equally  available  for  food. 

On  the  east  coast  at  Tauranga  is  the  Umbrella  Indica, 
which  is  a very  large  orange  slug,  five  inches  in  diameter, 
having  a round  shell  covered  with  a brown  epidermis,  the 
inside  of  a bright  orange,  and  fully  three  inches  in  diameter, 
the  slug  is  rare. 

Of  the  Bivalves.  The  Fam.  Veneredce  is  very  numerous, 
being  represented  by  about  twenty  kinds,  some  of  which  are 
fine  shells.  The  Venus  Plumbea  is  similar  to  a fossil  of  the 
Paris  basin. 

The  Mesodesma  shemnitzii,  holcota  pipi,  is  one  of  the  most 
abundant  of  all  the  New  Zealand  shell-fish,  and  generally 
eaten  by  the  natives.  The  large  mounds  of  shells  seen  along 
the  coast  attest  how  much  they  depended  upon  them  in  bye- 
gone  days  ; during  the  scarce  months  this  with  fern  root 
formed  their  chief  support. 

Of  the  Fam.  Tillinidce,  another  bivalve,  is  the  Toimanga,  a 
fine  large  shell,  which  is  generally  found  about  a foot-and-a- 
half  deep  in  the  sand  on  the  Manawatu  beach,  it  is  fully 
six  inches  long  and  four  wide,  so  that  it  requires  very 
few  of  them  to  satisfy  a man^s  appetite ; when  first  dug  up 
the  shell  has  a discoloured  appearance,  but  after  a little 
exposure  becomes  perfectly  white,  yet  though  massive,  is 
brittle.  The  delicately  painted  sympliacea,  and  the  pure 
white  paper-like  lucida  must  also  be  mentioned. 

Psammotia  nitida  is  a curious  fragile  little  shell,  whose 
bright,  glossy,  hard,  horn-like  epidermis  extends  far  beyond 
the  shell,  and  effectually  compensates  for  its  weakness. 

Of  the  Fam.  Solenidce , may  be  noticed  a beautiful  pearly 
transparent  shell,  very  fragile,  bulging  out  in  the  centre, 
with  a small  black  line  down  its  umbo  like  a crack ; there 
are  other  members  of  this  family. 

The  Byssoara  N.  Zealandice , striated  at  both  ends  with 
transverse  lines  between,  has  a thin  brown  epidermis. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


633 


and  spins  itself  a complete  cocoon,  of  a fine,  soft,  silky 
texture ; the  shell  is  entirely  inclosed  in  it,  and  numbers  of 
these  cocoons  are  found  woven  together  into  a mass,  which 
is  in  sufficient  quantity  to  render  it  capable  of  being  con- 
verted to  use.  Another  shell,  similar  in  form  to  Byssoara 
jpJiolades , generally  takes  up  its  abode  in  the  centre  of 
sponges. 

Of  the  Fam.  Arcadce  is  a large  Pectunculus , a thick,  heavy 
shell,  very  abundant  in  certain  localities,  both  in  a fossil  and 
recent  state. 

Fam.  Mytilidce  has  many  representatives,  Powhe,  hutai , 
huhu , one  kind  attains  a length  of  nearly  a foot,  with  a 
proportional  width,  and  in  the  Auckland  Isles  they  are 
found  even  fifteen  inches  long,  these  are  much  esteemed  by 
the  natives ; indeed,  all  the  different  kinds  are  eaten,  nor 
are  there  any  instances  of  their  proving  unwholesome,  but 
those  which  have  a parasitical  crab  within  are  thereby  ren- 
dered lean  and  less  palatable. 

Nor  is  the  Byssus  considered  poisonous,  one  peculiarity 
attending  them  is,  that  they  have  generally  a fine  large  tuft 
of  flustra  attached  to  the  upper  rim  of  the  shell  which, 
although  apparently  an  independent  growth,  may  still  act 
beneficially  in  arresting  and  conveying  suitable  food  within 
reach  of  the  fish.  To  show  the  native  estimation  of  these 
large  mussels,  a quantity  were  brought  to  Wanganui,  where 
they  are  not  found,  and  the  owner  quickly  disposed  of  them 
at  two -pence  each  to  the  natives. 

The  Pinna,  hu/pa,  is  abundaut,  and  of  large  size,  being 
frequently  more  than  a foot  long ; it  is  eaten,  as  is  likewise 
the  Pecten,  Jcua  Jcuct , of  which  there  are  several  varieties. 

The  Fam.  Ostreidoe  has  several  representatives. — The 
cockscomb  oyster,  tio,  ranges  from  Australia  to  New  Zealand, 
but  is  not  found  much  to  the  south  of  Auckland.  It  is  a 
rock  oyster,  having  its  lower  shell  generally  attached  to  the 
rock,  although  in  places  where  they  remain  any  time  undis- 
turbed they  adhere  to  one  another,  and  form  large  compact 
masses.  The  cockscomb  oyster  abounds  in  the  Mangrove 
swamps,  attached  to  the  roots  and  branches  of  that  tree. 


634 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


In  such  mud  flats  only,  are  they  met  with  in  a detached  state, 
being  struck  off  their  primary  resting-place  by  the  force  of 
the  waves,  or  the  decay  of  the  branch  to  which  they  cling, 
when  the  mass  of  shells  becomes  too  heavy  for  it. 

Further  south  a small  oyster  is  found  which  closely  resem- 
bles the  0.  Edulis  of  England,  and  a large  kind  of  mud  oyster, 
which  is  far  inferior  to  the  others,  being  coarser  and  ill- 
flavored.  The  smaller  oyster,  which  has  the  widest  range, 
is  little  if  at  all  inferior  to  the  much-esteemed  Natives  of  the 
old  country. 

The  Cardium,  Huawai  Pijpi,  a cockle  two  or  three  times 
as  large  as  its  English  namesake,  is  much  used  by  the 
natives,  nor  will  it  be  less  so  by  the  Europeans.  Black 
pearls  are  not  unfrequently  found  in  it,  and  some  as  large  as 
ordinary  garden  peas. 

Of  the  Fam.  Terubratulidce  there  are  four  known  varieties, 
two  large  and  two  small  kinds  ; two  are  striated,  three  are 
bright  red,  and  one  found  in  the  south  is  black.  These 
singular  shells  are  more  abundant  in  a fossil  than  in  a living 
state,  although  bunches  of  nearly  a dozen  adhering  to  one 
another  may  be  detached  from  the  rock. 

The  land  shells  of  New  Zealand  are  by  no  means  deficient 
in  beauty  or  variety,  although  they  are  rarely  to  be  met  with, 
except  the  very  minute  kinds. 

The  B-ulimus  Hongii  holds  the  chief  place ; it  is  more  than 
three  inches  long,  of  a dark  chocolate  color  externally,  and 
of  a rich  orange  red  internally.  The  range  of  this  shell  is 
very  limited,  being  only  from  the  North  Cape  to  the  Bay  of 
Islands,  but  in  reality  this  is  to  be  regarded  as  merely  the 
termination  of  its  range,  its  true  habitat  being  further  north 
in  the  tropics,  it  is  most  abundant  in  the  Three  Kings,  and 
is  also  found  in  New  Caledonia,  and  as  far  north  as  the 
Philippine  Islands,  where  it  is  known  as  the  Bulimus  Fulge- 
tans.  The  female  shell  is  white  in  the  inside,  its  usual  locality 
is  at  the  roots  of  flax  plants ; the  natives  eat  them.  Those 
from  the  Three  Kings  have  the  outer  lip  thickened,  and  the 
shell  altogether  stronger  formed. 

Helix  Busbyi,  pupu  rangi , is  a fine  large  shell  two-and- 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


635 


a-half  inches  in  diameter,  with  a glossy  dark  olive-colored 
epidermis,  and  blueish  grey  inside;  it  extends  as  far  south 
as  Auckland.  A similar  Helix,  half-an-inch  less  in  dia- 
meter, ranges  as  far  south  as  Waikato.  Another  kind  is 
met  with  at  Hokianga,  which  differs  from  the  former  in 
having  its  volutions  girdled  with  one  band  instead  of  three, 
the  color  of  this  band  is  blackish  brown,  whilst  the  general 
color  of  the  shell  is  a dull  olivaceous  brown.  It  is  rather 
singular,  although  no  Jand  shell  at  all  approaching  these  in 
size  has  been  met  to  the  south  of  the  Waikato  in  the  Northern 
Island,  two  specimens  of  a helix,  allied  to  Helix  Busbyi,  have 
been  discovered  in  the  vicinity  of  Nelson. 

A beautiful  shell.  Helix  Dunnioe,  Helix  Caroiolla  Zelandia, 
is  found  on  the  Kawau  an  inch  in  diameter,  of  a light  yel- 
lowish brown,  surrounded  with  a white  ridge-like  keel  on 
the  outer  whorl.  Another  Helix  of  similar  size  is  met  with 
as  far  south  as  the  Waitara.  A large  chocolate-colored  slug 
has  its  habitat  in  the  interior,  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Wan- 
ganui, having  a miniature  haliotis  shell  on  its  back  covered 
with  a light  olive  epidermis.  There  are  smaller  kinds  of 
slugs  with  similar  shells  on  their  backs,  which  differ  in  being 
less  in  size,  longer,  and  of  a darker  color. 

The  TJniOy  or  fresh-water  mussel,  Ttaltahi,  inhabits  nearly 
all  our  streams  and  lakes.  The  finest  are  those  in  the 
Waikari  Lake,  which  are  distinguished  by  their  size,  round- 
ness, and  light  glossy  epidermis  ; it  may  be  remarked  of  the 
New  Zealand  unio,  that,  as  a general  rule,  the  lake  unios  are 
small,  round,  and  thick,  whilst  those  in  the  rivers  are  long, 
narrow,  and  flat.  The  natives  eat  them,  but  their  strong 
earthy  flavor  and  insipid  taste  will  never  render  them  an 
article  of  European  consumption  ; they  are  extremely  abun- 
dant, as  is  evidenced  by  the  large  shell  heaps  encircling  the 
lakes.  The  imported  rat,  however,  feeds  upon  them,  and  by 
breaking  the  umbo,  obtains  a speedy  access  to  the  fish;  little 
heaps  of  shells  close  to  the  water's  edge,  are  the  remains  of 
his  feasts.  Pearls,  and  some  very  fine  ones,  are  not  unfre- 
quently  met  with  in  the  fresh-water  mussels,  especially  those 
in  Rotorua  Lake  ; two  kinds  are  there  obtained,  a fine  round 


636 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


one,  and  another  flat,  as  if  split  in  two,  but  both  very  bright 
and  lustrous. 

The  fresh-water  streams  contain  innumerable  diminutive 
shells,  the  largest  is  a Melanopsis , which  is  met  with  in  fresh- 
water streams,  and  also  near  the  mouth  of  rivers.  A minute 
shell  (Animalcula  Trichotropis)  is  found  in  every  rivulet ; 
when  full-grown  the  whorls  are  encircled  with  spines,  when 
young  it  is  without  them  ; this  is  the  chief  food  of  the  inanga, 
which  swallows  them  entire,  and  thus  renders  the  Taupo 
inanga  inferior  to  those  of  other  lakes,  because  they  remain 
undigested,  and  render  it  gritty  in  eating. 

The  rocky  streams  have  a little  ancylus,  and  amongst  other 
caddis  worms,  one  kind  of  Phryganea,  which  inhabits  a 
dentalia-shaped  horny  case,  which  might  almost  be  termed 
a shell,  and  another  which  forms  its  case  of  agglutinated 
particles  of  sand  in  the  form  of  a trochus,  and  it  was  a ques- 
tion with  Mr.  Swainson,  whether  it  was  a caddis  worm  or  not. 

In  the  salt  swamps  is  found  a shell  of  fam.  auriculidce,  and 
a solitary  pupa  may  be  met  with  in  the  woods. 

The  Physa  variabilis  inhabits  fresh-water  lakes  near  the 
sea,  as  also  a limnea,  with  the  opening  on  the  left  side. 

The  fam.  Octopodidoea  is  well  represented,  and  if  the 
accounts  of  the  natives  can  be  relied  upon,  they  attain  a 
very  large  size,  and  it  required  no  ordinary  stock  of  courage 
to  encounter  them. 

The  Sepia  is  called  by  the  natives  he  wehi;  it  is  very 
abundant  in  all  the  New  Zealand  seas.  The  Loligo  is  more 
rarely  met  with ; to  one  of  these  belongs  the  beautiful  little 
chambered  spirula  so  common  on  our  shores,  and  so  closely 
resembling  the  nautilus. 

Several  species  of  the  Echinus  (heMna)  are  found  on  all  the 
shores  of  New  Zealand.  Some  attain  a very  large  size,  are 
eaten  alive,  and  esteemed  peculiarly  good.  It  is  recorded 
that  they  formed  the  chief  dish  of  the  famous  supper  of 
Lucullus,  when  he  was  made  flamen  martialis,  priest  of  Mars. 
A large  flat  kind  is  very  common,  both  in  a living  and  fossil 
state,  but  the  great  round  one  is  not  met  with  as  a fossil. 

In  the  Wellington  Harbour  a very  fragile  echinus  is  dredged 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


637 


up,  which  has  its  fossil  counterpart  in  Europe.  The  New 
Zealand  Echini  are  all  remarkable  for  their  very  small  spines, 
but  one  is  found  in  a fossil  state,  very  closely  resembling  a 
fine  Australian  one,  having  large  ones. 

Genus  Echino  dermata  Bonella,  a thick  fleshy  substance, 
of  a reddish  brown  color,  met  with  on  the  sandy  shores. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  Dentalia — one  plain,  the  other 
striated  and  curved — the  first  attains  a length  of  three  inches ; 
a third  may  be  mentioned,  which  is  formed  of  agglutinized 
particles  of  sand ; these  are  all  found  as  fossils  also,  and  of  a 
larger  size. 

Of  the  Cirrh'ipedes  may  be  noticed  a curious-branched  kind, 
composed  of  numbers  united  together  in  the  form  of  branches. 

A.  balanus , which  is  attached  to  the  skin  of  the  sperm 
whale,  is  high  and  rounded;  another,  infesting  the  black 
whale,  is  flat. 

There  is  nothing  particular  to  distinguish  the  chitons  of 
New  Zealand  from  those  of  other  parts,  they  are  numerous 
and  some  large. 

Of  the  Radiata,  the  Actinice , sea  anemonies,  are  extremely 
beautiful ; the  isles  contain  about  six  or  eight  kinds.  Some 
of  the  star  fish  are  large,  one  measures  a foot  from  the  end 
of  one  ray  to  that  of  the  opposite  one,  and  has  eleven  rays  ; 
another  has  five  very  long  ones,  compact,  and  scaly  in  ap- 
pearance. 

Ojphiura  Annulosa. — The  Asterias  Tessilata  is  very  abun- 
dant in  most  sheltered  waters. 

The  Acalephce,  or  sea-nettle,  onga-onga , numbers  are  thrown 
up  by  every  gale,  and  are  conspicuous  by  their  deep  purple 
hue,  of  these  is  the  velellata,  jpoti-poti , with  its  curious 
transparent  cartilaginous-frame,  rising  like  a sun-dial  fixed 
on  an  oval  base.  One  of  this  fam.  is  very  common  in  the 
New  Zealand  seas  ; the  body  is  gelatinous,  transparent,  and 
rather  solid,  oblong  in  form,  terminating  with  a beak ; it  is 
a linked  molusc,  numbers  being  found  attached  to  each 
other,  and  so  compactly  as  to  leave  no  place  between  them, 
thus  forming  regular  figures,  but  easily  separated ; they 
have  an  open  stomach,  through  which  water  is  seen  to  pass. 


638 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


and  thus  propel  themselves  along  by  repeatedly  injecting 
and  rejecting  it;  it  is  met  with  in  large  quantities,  is  highly 
phosphorescent,  and  appears  to  be  no  small  cause  of  the 
luminous  appearance  of  the  southern  seas.  A beautiful  Me- 
dusa is  abundant  in  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound,  shaped  like 
a six-petalled  flower,  having  an  inner  circle  with  double  that 
number,  and  a cross  formed  by  four  ovals  in  the  centre. 

The  corals,  coralines,  and  flustra  of  New  Zealand,  present 
a wide  field  of  interest  to  the  naturalist.  A jointed  coral 
of  the  genus,  izis,  is  found  on  the  east  coast  of  large  size. 

A few  words  must  be  said  of  the  sponges,  pungoru-ngoru, 
hautai.  New  Zealand  possesses  many  varieties  of  them,  and 
some  are  equal  in  every  respect  to  the  best  from  Turkey, 
both  in  size,  fineness,  and  firmness  of  texture.  The  sponge 
is  an  article  so  useful  and  expensive,  that  it  is  a pity  no 
attention  has  yet  been  paid  to  it ; specimens  were  sent  to  the 
Royal  Exhibition  in  1851 . The  finest  which  have  fallen  under 
the  writer's  notice  were  obtained  near  the  Sugar  Loaves, 
Taranaki,  nor  have  any  equal  to  them  been  found  south  of 
that  place.  It  is  a valuable  spot  for  a sponge  fishery,  and 
were  one  established,  it  could  not  fail  being  remunerative. 

Of  the  Crustacea , it  may  be  remarked,  that  New  Zealand 
does  not  possess  the  Palinurus,  or  true  lobster,  nor  even 
a crab  at  all  approaching  those  of  England  in  size,  the 
largest  being  of  very  diminutive  proportions.  The  best 
proof  of  its  insignificance  is,  that  even  the  natives,  who  are 
omniverous,  do  not  think  them  worth  collecting  for  food. 
There  are,  however,  many  varieties  of  the  Cancer,  that  which 
most  nearly  approaches  the  C.  Paguria  of  the  English  seas, 
attains  a size  of  about  two  inches  across  the  carapace.  The 
crab  found  in  the  mussel  is  orbicular  in  form,  but  the  largest 
kind  is  shaped  like  the  spider,  and  covered  with  spines  and 
hair,  Eriphia  spinifrons.  The  soldier  crabs  are  abundant, 
appropriating  to  themselves  deserted  shells  suited  to  their 
size.  A small  crab,  rerepari  papaka , frequents  the  banks  of 
tidal  rivers,  and  salt-water  marshes.  A diminutive  crab  is 
found  sixty  miles  up  the  Waikato  river,  and  a very  small 
one  in  the  lake  on  the  north  shore,  Auckland,  which  is 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


639 


distinguished  by  having  a depressed  tuberculous  carapace, 
with  a saucer-like  rim,  the  lip  and  claws  thickly  covered  with 
hair-like  spines,  resembling  Pagurus  Pelosus.  That  lake  has 
every  appearance  of  having  been  once  filled  with  sea  water ; 
all  its  inhabitants,  though  diminutive,  have  a marine  ap- 
pearance ; it  contains  sponges,  shrimps,  a black  slug,  and  a 
transparent  gelatinous  zoophyte  attached  to  the  rocks,  which 
is  highly  phosphorescent ; even  its  weeds  resemble  marine 
Algae. 

The  Koura,  Palinurus  cray  fish,  attains  a size  of  full  two 
feet ; it  is  abundant,  well  flavored,  and  highly  esteemed,  the 
natives  take  them  in  baskets,  which  they  weight  and  let 
down  into  the  parts  they  frequent.  The  fresh- water  Koura , 
or  Karawai,  astacus  fluviatilis,  differs  little  from  the  marine 
one,  except  in  size  and  color,  it  is  generally  from  three  to 
four  inches  long,  although  it  attains  nearly  double  that  size  in 
the  Rotorua  Lake,  and  at  the  Paparoa  Rapid,  150  miles  up 
the  Wanganui,  it  is  found  fully  ten  inches  long,  probably  a 
different  species,  being  long,  narrow,  and  more  spiny ; whilst 
the  marine  cray  fish  is  red,  the  fresh-water  one  is  black, 
although,  according  to  the  proverb,  Ka  whe  te  hour  a , — it  no 
sooner  touches  the  hot  water  than  it  becomes  red. 

Of  the  Palmonidce,  may  be  mentioned  a large  shrimp, 
mama  iti,  and  a small  one,  ho  iviti-witi  moana  ; a very  minute 
fresh-water  one,  and  a sand  hopper,  amphipoda  class  myria- 
poda.  New  Zealand  possesses  a centipede,  hura , four  or  five 
inches  long,  of  a dirty  yellow  olive  color,  with  a purple  shade 
in  the  sun ; it  is  little  less  than  the  Australian  one,  but  does 
not  appear  to  be  equally  dangerous,  for  although  frequently 
handled  by  children  shews  little  inclination  to  bite,  still  it 
may  not  be  altogether  innoxious.  There  is  also  a smaller  one, 
weri,  of  about  half  the  size  of  the  former,  of  a yellow  buff 
color,  yrith  more  legs  than  the  larger;  and  likewise  a still 
smaller  one,  wehe,  with  innumerable  legs,  the  insect  is  long, 
but  little  more  than  a line  in  thickness,  of  a light  buff  color. 
A large  Marine  centipede,  toki  warau,  is  also  common. 

Class  Arachnida.  The  native  name  for  all  spiders  is  Pun - 
gawerewere , or  Puawere . One  only  is  dignified  by  another 


640 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


name  and  that  is  the  Katijpo , a black  spot  very  delicately 
formed,  with  a red  cross  on  its  neck,  surrounded  with  white 
spots,  which  add  much  to  its  beauty,  the  female  is  entirely 
black.  This  spider  does  not  make  any  web,  but  takes  up 
its  abode  in  small  tufts  of  a particular  kind  of  grass  growing 
near  the  sea,  upon  which  the  natives  carefully  avoid  sitting, 
as  the  bite,  of  this  insect  is  very  painful,  and  the  effect 
frequently  remains  for  several  days,  any  strong  alkati,  how- 
ever, will  neutralize  the  poison.  New  Zealand  possesses  a 
Tarantula,  of  a slate  color,  legs  hairy,  body  remarkably  flat, 
it  is  generally  found  in  the  cracks  or  between  the  bark  of 
dead  timber ; it  appears  to  be  harmless ; though  much  less 
than  the  Australian  Tarantula,  it  is  still  a large  spider,  very 
compact  and  strongly  made.  There  is  also  a large  hunting 
spider  which  may  be  called  Tecknophora,  from  carrying  its 
young  on  its  back,  they  are  piled  up  in  great  numbers,  which 
makes  it  appear  as  if  covered  with  spines ; when  alarmed  it 
runs  off  with  its  load,  and  if  touched,  the  little  ones  jump  down 
aud  run  off  like  outside  passengers  from  a coach.  One  of 
the  most  interesting  of  the  family  is  the  water  spider,  which 
dives  to  the  bottom,  and  takes  up  its  abode  under  stones, 
carrying  down  with  it  a globule  of  air  to  support  life,  this 
is  so  instantaneous  that  it  cannot  have  time  to  spin  a web  to 
contain  it,  as  the  European  one  is  said  to  do.  It  seems 
simply  to  confine  the  air  globe  between  its  legs  and  belly. 
Although  the  hunting  spider  weaves  no  web  to  entangle  its 
prey,  one  kind  makes  a very  ingenious  abode  to  deposit  its 
eggs  in,  by  bringing  the  topmost  leaves  together,  and 
surrounding  them  with  a close -woven  web  of  considerable 
size,  within  which  it  brings  up  its  young.  Another  deposits 
its  eggs  between  two  round  plates  as  large  as  a shilling, 
which  are  most  artistically  made,  and  ornamented  with  a 
circular  rim.  Indeed,  many  of  the  egg  cases  of  spiders  merit 
attention,  from  the  curious  manner  in  which  they  are  con- 
structed. It  may  be  remarked  that  spiders  generally  select 
their  abodes  on  substances  of  similar  color  to  their  own. 
The  brown  ones  take  up  their  residence  on  stems  of  trees, 
whilst  the  green  live  amongst  leaves  ; the  Tarantula  is 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


641 


found  on  fences,,  where  the  wood  is  of  their  own  slate  color, 
and  the  black  on  charred  timber,  one  spotted  with  white  is 
scarcely  distinguishable  from  it.  Some  suppose  that,  chame- 
leon like,  they  change  their  color  according  to  circumstances, 
but  it  is  more  probable  that  they  act  by  instinct,  the  better 
to  elude  the  observation  of  their  prey,  or  their  enemies, 
several  other  insects  do  the  same,  as  the  mantis,  cicada, 
locust,  and  some  kinds  of  beetles.  But  this  remark  does  not 
apply  in  general  to  the  web- spinning  class. 

The  spider  was  formerly  an  object  of  reverence,  the  Maori 
supposed  their  atuas  used  it  as  an  organ  of  communication, 
and  descended  from  heaven  by  the  aid  of  its  thread. 

New  Zealand  has  no  true  scorpion,  the  nearest  approach 
is  a small  insect  not  larger  than  the  flea,  of  the  genus 
Phalangum,  which,  although  shaped  like  one,  in  having 
a pair  of  claws,  is  without  a tail,  and  has  no  sting.  It  is 
found  amongst  the  dry  sand  of  the  sea  shore,  and  bites  most 
freely,  but  not  worse  than  the  common  flea.  Amongst  the 
Goleoptera  may  be  noticed  the  Cicindella,  moeone,  a beautiful 
bronze-spotted  active  little  beetle,  which  burrows  in  our 
garden  walks  and  is  always  on  the  look  out  for  its  prey. 
In  summer  the  Tanguru,  a large  green  beetle,  is  found  in 
the  forest,  and  the  kiriwai , a very  beautiful  metallic  green 
one,  with  red  streaks,  visits  the  Manuka  trees ; the  Mumu- 
tawa , the  largest  beetle  of  New  Zealand,  takes  up  its  abode 
in  the  sand  hills  near  the  sea,  it  is  remarkable  for  its  thick 
round  form,  and  the  weakness  of  its  elytra,  it  is  of  a light 
brown  color  and  is  frequently  taken  possession  of  by  a fungus, 
which  entirely  occupies  its  body,  without  sending  up  any  shoot. 

The  Goccinella , lady -bird,  or  cow-lady,  so  well  known  in 
the  nursery  rhymes  of  our  father  land,  is  black,  with  sixteen 
yellow  spots  upon  it,  there  is  also  a beautiful  little  black  one 
without  any  spot ; a fine  water-beetle,  dytiscus , fully  an  inch 
long,  is  found  in  lakes  and  rivers. 

The  Cerambyx.  Tapoi , kaka , kapapa,  karewarewa,  koroi- 
pepe,  is  a numerous  family,  some  of  which  are  large  and 
destructive  to  fruit  and  other  trees.  The  grub  of  the  largest 
pierces  the  puriri,  vitex  litoralis,  the  hardest  timber  of  New 

T T 


642 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


Zealand,  and  makes  a perforation  of  tlie  size  and  shape  of  a 
tenpenny  nail.  Three  varieties  of  the  Elater  are  common, 
they  appear  to  have  increased  since  the  colonization  of  the 
islands;  at  Auckland  it  is  found  in  all  the  houses,  and  is 
likely  to  become  a nuisance,  one  kind  is  long  and  narrow, 
another  large,  with  a brown  down  on  its  elytra,  the  third 
small,  and  all  are  black,  this  insect  is  remarkable  for  its 
great  power  of  spring,  when  laid  on  its  back  it  feigns  death, 
and  then  suddenly  jumps  up  and  escapes ; this  power  is 
seated  between  the  thorax  and  the  elytra. 

There  are  many  kinds  of  the  curculio,  which  is  a beautiful 
and  interesting  family,  although  greatly  varied  in  form,  still 
preserving  a marked  affinity  to  one  another  in  the  elongation 
of  the  thorax,  one  of  which  has  it  of  the  same  length  as  the 
entire  body ; another  is  of  a beautiful  glossy  black,  with 
spines  or  protuberances  on  its  back.  There  is  also  a cream 
colored  one,  very  sluggish  in  its  movements. 

A singular  black  beetle,  covered  with  a rusty- colored  down, 
having  the  appearance  of  the  hinder  part  being  cut  off,  is 
found  on  charred  timber. 

The  ear-wig  Forficula,  is  a large  insect,  fully  an  inch-and 
a-half  long,  it  is  fortunately  seldom  met  with,  and  appears  to 
be  the  only  one  belonging  to  New  Zealand. 

Orthoptera,  mata.  The  Blatta,  or  cock  roach  is  not 
above  half  the  size  of  the  B.  Americana,  an  introduced  pest, 
its  body  is  oval,  brown  and  striped  with  bands  of  a dirty 
yellow.  It  appears  to  be  identical  with  that  of  Australia. 

The  locust,  grasshopper,  mawitivnti,  is  a numerous  family, 
some  attain  a considerable  size,  a black  one  is  found  in  the 
interior ; since  the  introduction  of  poultry,  and  especially 
the  turkey,  their  increase  has  been  checked,  and  they  are 
less  destructive  than  formerly. 

The  Pahau  roa-roa , a large  flying  locust,  is  periodically 
troublesome,  at  other  times  scarcely  seen. 

The  Piharengcb,  pirenga,  field  cricket ; its  chirrup  resembles 
the  singing  of  a bird,  and  in  the  south,  where  it  is  far  from 
being  common,  the  children  keep  it  in  bottles  for  the  sake  of 
its  song ; in  the  north  it  is  becoming  so  numerous  as  likely 
to  prove  a pest. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


643 


The  Grylloptalpa,  mole  cricket,  Honi,  is  a large  and  singular 
insect,  seldom  met  with  unless  in  digging,  as  it  lives  under 
ground,  the  chief  insect  of  this  family  is  the  Deinacrida, 
Weta,  forest  cricket,  which  may  be  almost  termed  a giant  ; 
the  body  being  often  three  inches  long,  and  its  antennge 
double  that  length,  its  hind  legs  are  more  elongated  than 
the  fore  legs,  and  all  are  armed  with  formidable  spines,  and 
enable  it  to  seize  its  prey  or  enemy,  and  inflict  a very  severe 
wound  by  suddenly  compressing  its  legs  upon  the  offending 
object.  The  Weta  is  found  in  the  forest  amongst  dead  timber. 

There  are  several  kinds  of  Mantis,  Ro,  Wairaha,  green, 
red,  and  brown,  the  largest  are  nearly  four  inches  long; 
the  grub  of  the  mantis  lives  in  a beaufcifully-formed  case, 
Whare  Atua,  constructed  of  small  twigs,  cemented  together 
externally,  but  internally  lined  with  the  softest  silk,  it  forms 
a perfect  bag,  the  top  drawn  tight  by  a string,  which  also 
encircles  the  twig  it  feeds  on,  one  end  of  the  string  being 
attached  to  the  insect ; when  it  is  at  rest  it  sinks  down  into 
the  bag,  and  its  weight  draws  the  orifice  tight,  when  it  feeds 
the  string  is  released,  the  bag  opens,  and  its  head  protrudes 
to  feed  upon  the  leaves. 

Fam.  Neuroptera. — There  are  four  or  five  kinds  of  dragon 
flies,  the  largest,  Kapokapowai  is  often  seen  from  four-and-a- 
half  to  five  inches  in  length.  In  summer  they  frequent  the 
sea-shore  in  great  numbers,  where  they  perish,  and  are  seen 
stretched  out  on  the  wet  sands,  showing  the  probable  way 
fossil  ones  found  in  sand  stone  became  imbedded  by  some 
sudden  convulsion  overtaking  them.  There  is  a small  red- 
bodied and  a bright  blue  one,  Kihi  tara  and  he'kewai. 

Hymenoptera.  The  ant,  pohorua  popohorua. — There  are 
several  kinds,  but  none  of  them  very  large  or  numerous, 
as  in  Australia,  where  they  are  exceedingly  troublesome. 
There  are  black,  red,  and  white  ants,  as  well  as  a very 
minute  red  one.  The  formicaleo,  lion  ant,  is  also  met  with, 
which  in  its  size,  form  and  habits  appears  to  be  identical 
with  the  European  one. 

Homoptera.  The  cicada,  Tarakihi,  is  everywhere  met 
with  in  summer,  and,  indeed,  is  to  be  viewed  as  the  har- 

t t 2 


644 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


binger  of  it.  There  are  four  kinds,  two  large  and  two 
small,  all  are  distinguished  by  three  bright  red  transparent 
spots  set  in  a triangle  on  the  forehead,  like  brilliant  rubies. 
One  of  the  larger  kind  is  green,  the  other  green  and  black ; 
one  of  the  smaller  is  a bright  green  with  a silver  line  down 
the  ridge  of  the  back ; they  make  a very  loud  grating  noise, 
and  generally  in  concert,  beginning  and  stopping  together. 
The  Maori  compare  the  sound  to  the  English  language,  hence 
they  call  it  he  reo  kihi  kihi , the  cicada’s  language,  and  thus 
they  name  the  European,  he  kihikihi,  a cicada.  They  have 
likewise  a proverb  amongst  themselves,  me  he  kihi  kei  te  warn , 
like  the  cicada  in  summer,  a proverb  for  a noisy  party.  The 
cicada  is  sometimes  found  with  a parasitical  plant  growing 
out  of  it,  Sphoeria  Basilii. 

Hemiptera.  A large  black  forest  bug,  ke  keriru , is  fully  an 
inch-and-a-half  long ; the  effluvia  emitted  by  it  is  extremely 
powerful  and  offensive.  There  are  several  smaller  kinds, 
Kiriwhenua,  all  more  or  less  distinguished  by  their  odour. 

Lepidoptera.  Pepepe,  Pepe  atua.  The  butterflies  of  New 
Zealand  are  few  in  species  and  number,  the  varieties  are 
not  more  than  eight  or  ten,  of  these  the  most  common  and 
finest  are  the  vanessa  Gonerilla , vanessa  Itea  and  cynthia 
cardui,  which  is  identical  with  that  of  Australia  and  Europe. 
The  Diadema  auge  is,  perhaps,  the  rarest  and  finest  of  all, 
it  is  a brown  butterfly,  with  four  large  white  eyes  or  spots, 
tinged  with  purple.  The  Polyommatus  edna,  also  closely 
resembles  one  of  our  European  butterflies  ; these  with  a 
small  blue  argus  are  the  chief  kinds. 

Of  the  moths  Pepe , the  Hepialus  rubro  viridans , is  the 
largest  and  finest,  it  measures  nearly  six  inches  across,  from 
the  tip  of  one  wing  to  the  other.  The  Erebus,  Parikori-taua, 
is  conspicuous  by  two  eyes  on  its  wings  ; the  nyctemera  is 
identical  with  that  of  Australia. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  the  sphinx,  the  largest  is  the 
sphinx  convolvuli.  The  Sphoeria  Robertii  is  said  to  be  para- 
sitical on  the  caterpillar  of  the  sphinx,  but  it  is  quite  a 
different  shaped  one,  as  it  has  no  horn  on  its  extremity  as 
that  of  the  sphynx  caterpillar,  which  likewise  never  leaves 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


645 


the  kumara  grounds,,  where  this  sphoeria  is  never  found. 
The  vegetating  caterpillar  is  always  met  with  in  the  forest 
at  the  roots  of  the  rata,  black  maire,  and  manuka,  where  the 
sphinx  caterpillar  is  never  seen,  its  Maori  name  is  hotete, 
whilst  that  of  the  sphinx  is  aweto,  it  therefore  most  likely 
belongs  to  the  Repialus  rubro  viridans , which  is  only  found  in 
the  forest.  At  Taranaki,  there  is  another  caterpillar  which 
undergoes  a similar  change ; it  is  much  smaller  than  the 
other,  being  perhaps  that  of  Repialus  virescens , but  no 
bulrush  proceeds  from  it ; like  the  other,  the  body  only  is 
occupied  by  the  fungus. 

Riptera  Simulium,  namu,  a little  black  sand-fly,  it  is  most 
abundant  and  troublesome  in  sandy  places  during  summer. 

Culex,  waeroa,  a musquito,  is  a pest  in  summer,  it  is  chiefly 
confined  to  the  low  lands ; sometimes  it  disappears  entirely 
for  several  days,  according  to  the  state  of  the  weather,  and 
then  returns  with  recruited  strength  and  virulence ; the  old 
natives  affirm  it  was  not  indigenous  to  the  country,  and 
certainly  there  is  much  to  support  the  assertion.  A few 
years  ago  it  was  not  found  more  than  thirty  miles  inland 
from  the  sea  at  Wanganui,  it  is  now  as  abundant  in  the 
interior  as  on  the  coast.  At  Auckland  a new  kind  has  been 
recently  introduced  from  India,  a black  and  white  striped 
one,  the  zebra  musquito,  it  is  said  to  have  arrived  in  the  same 
vessels  which  brought  the  military  thence.  The  old  settlers 
in  Australia  likewise  entertained  the  same  idea  that  the  mus- 
quito was  not  indigenous  there,  but  also  came  from  India.* 
It  is  singular  that  the  Tipula,  which  is  so  well  known  by  the 
name  of  Daddy  Long-legs,  should  have  precisely  the  same 
name  amongst  the  Maori,  matua  wairoa. 

Musca  sarcophaga ; two  large  meat  flies,  the  blue  and 
yellow-bodied,  rango  and  patupaearehe}  are  both  said  to  be 
introduced  from  New  South  Wales,  as  well  as  the  smaller 
house  fly ; the  larger  being  a recent  importation  from  Eng- 
land, its  arrival  may  be  dated  from  the  year  1845.  The  two 

* In  a voyage  from  Sydney  to  London  twelve  kinds  of  insects,  beetles,  flies, 
&c.,  of  Australia,  reached  London  in  good  health  and  sufficient  numbers  to 
propagate  these  species  ; what  an  interchange  of  this  kind  must  be  going  on  ! 


646 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


former  are  viviparous,  it  is  the  female  only  which  makes  the 
loud  buzzing  noise.  The  true  New  Zealand  musca  is  a 
denizen  of  the  forest,  a very  fine  large  fly  with  a golden  hue, 
covered  with  hair,  and  is  by  no  means  numerous. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  bees  indigenous  to  New  Zealand, 
one  having  a large  deep  blue  body  and  wings,  similar  to  one 
found  both  in  Australia  and  Europe,  another  with  a small 
long  narrow  black  body,  it  makes  its  nest  in  hollow  twigs, 
and  deposits  the  bee  bread  and  honey  in  the  same  cell,  the 
honey  floating  above  the  other.  The  third  and  least  makes 
its  nest  in  dry  sandy  ground ; all  appear  to  be  hermit  bees, 
and  sting. 

A beautiful  golden  green  fly,  F.  Ghrysididce,  or  golden 
wasp,  is  the  most  brilliant  of  the  New  Zealand  flies,  it  is 
seen  hovering  about  on  the  brightest  sunny  days. 

Lumbricus , Tohe , there  are  many  kinds,  some  attaining  a 
very  large  size,  even  more  than  two  feet ; in  a small  lake  on 
the  Kawau,  there  is  a kind  which  is  said  to  be  seen  more 
than  a yard  long.*  The  Tcenia , tape-worm,  is  not  uncommon, 
the  natives  say  it  is  acquired  by  drinking  the  water  of  moun- 
tain springs,  when  they  perforate  the  skin  and  make  their 
appearance  externally,  they  skilfully  wind  out  these  worms 
upon  a bit  of  stick.  The  Tohe  wetara  is  a short  kind  of  worm. 
The  T.  piripiri  a small  one.  The  T.  puraharoro  is  a large 
long  one,  found  in  the  clefts  of  rocks,  this  was  eaten.  T.  tijoa , 
a very  large  long  worm,  which  fed  on  roots,  this  was  much 
prized  as  a great  delicacy ; there  is  a saying  that  the  rehab, 
sweetness,  of  this  worm,  remained  in  the  mouth  for  two 
days  after  it  was  eaten.  The  engaio,  a long  white  worm, 
like  a line,  is  a parasite  infesting  the  inanga  of  Rotorua 
Lake,  and  during  settled  rain  in  some  parts  to  the  north  it 
breeds  in  the  little  pools  of  standing  water,  coiled  up  in 
knots  of  great  length.  Several  of  the  small  earth-worms, 
Piritaua , Puratoke , are  highly  phosphorescent,  particularly 
those  found  in  caves  and  at  the  roots  of  rushes  by  the  water 
side.  A worm  found  on  the  sand  hills,  forms  large  masses 
of  calcareous  matter  from  its'  slime,  probably  given  out 

* Sir  G.  Grey. 


NATUEAL  HISTOEY. 


647 


during  the  day  from  the  heat  of  the  sand,  these  singular 
lumps  are  full  of  the  windings  of  the  worm. 

Hirudo,  ngata,  leech,  a small  one  is  found  in  most  lakes 
and  ponds,  it  is  about  a quarter  of  the  size  of  the  medicinal 
one,  which  appears  to  possess  all  the  blood-sucking  powers 
of  the  European  kind,  and  doubtless  might  be  used  for  that 
purpose.  In  the  waters  where  it  is  found,  bathers  frequently 
find  them  on  their  legs. 

There  is  a considerable  variety  of  land  leeches  : one  is  of 
a bright  red  color,  another  of  a pale  buff,  a third  deep 
chocolate,  a fourth  a chocolate  with  a yellow  border ; they 
are  found  under  stones  and  decayed  timber,  and  seem  to  be 
perfectly  harmless. 

Fam.  Branchiopopodea  apus  cly clops.  This  singular  en- 
tomostraca  attains  a size  of  two  inches  in  length,  and  is  very 
rarely  seen,  but  then  it  appears  in  large  numbers. 

Such  is  a faint  outline  of  the  Zoology  of  these  Islands,  in  a 
brief  essay  nothing  more  can  be  attempted ; much  of  necessity 
must  be  omitted  of  what  is  imperfectly  known,  and  still  more 
remains  to  be  discovered ; but  sufficient,  perhaps,  has  been 
written  to  invite  further  and  more  extended  investigation, 
and  more  than  enough  to  show  that  the  Natural  History  of 
New  Zealand  will  amply  repay  such  trouble  being  bestowed 
upon  it. 


A VEGETATING  CICADA. 


648 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


THE  BULRUSH  CATERPILLAR. 

Description  of  the  Bulrush  Caterpillar,  Sphceria  Robertsia ; 

Native  name,  Aweto-Hotete. 

This  singular  plant,  which  is  a native  of  New  Zealand, 
may  be  classed  amongst  the  most  remarkable  productions  of 
the  vegetable  kingdom. 

There  are  birds  which  dispossess  others  of  their  nests,  and 
marine  animals  which  take  up  their  abode  in  deserted  shells ; 
but  the  sphoeria  surpasses  all,  by  killing  and  taking  posses- 
sion, making  the  body  of  an  insect — and  that,  too,  very 
probably,  a living  one — the  foundation  from  whence  it  rears 
its  stem,  and  the  source  from  which  it  derives  its  support. 
It  certainly  forms  one  of  the  most  surprising  links  between 
the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom  yet  noticed,  and,  as  such, 
merits  as  circumstantial  a description  as  our  present  imper- 
fect acquaintance  with  it  will  allow. 

The  aweto  is  found  at  the  root  of  the  rata  and  other 
trees.  The  plant,  in  every  instance,  exactly  fills  the  body  of 
the  caterpillar ; in  the  finest  specimens  it  attains  the  length 
of  three  inches  and-a-half,  and  the  stem  which  germinates 
from  this  metamorphosed  body,  is  from  six  to  ten  inches 
high  ; its  apex,  when  in  a state  of  fructification,  resembles 
a fern,  but  in  form  the  club-headed  bulrush  in  miniature. 
There  are  no  leaves— a solitary  stem  comprises  the  entire 
plant;  if  any  accident  breaks  it  off,  a second  arises  from 
the  same  spot.  The  body  is  always  found  buried,  as  well  as 
the  greater  portion  of  the  stalk ; when  it  attains  its  maturity, 
it  soon  dies  away. 

These  curious  plants  are  far  from  being  uncommon ; when 
fresh,  they  have  the  flavor  of  a nut ; the  natives  eat  them, 
and  likewise  used  them  when  burnt  as  coloring  matter  for 
tattooing,  rubbing  the  powder  into  the  wounds,  in  which 
state  it  has  a strong  animal  smell ; when  newly  dug  up, 
the  substance  of  the  caterpillar  is  soft;  and  being  divided 
longitudinally,  the  intestinal  canal  is  distinctly  seen.  Most 
specimens  possess  the  legs  entire,  with  the  horny  part  of  the 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


649 


head,  the  mandibles  and  claws  ; the  vegetating  process  in- 
variably proceeds  from  the  nape  of  the  neck,  from  which  it 
may  be  inferred  that  the  insect,  in  crawling  to  the  place 
where  it  inhumes  itself,  prior  to  its  metamorphosis,  whilst 
burrowing  in  the  vegetable  soil,  gets  some  of  the  minute 
spores  of  this  fungus  between  the  scales  of  its  neck,  from 
which,  in  its  sickening  state,  it  is  unable  to  free  itself,  and, 
consequently,  being  nourished  by  the  warmth  and  moisture 
of  the  insects  body,  then  lying  in  a motionless  state,  they 
vegetate,  and  not  only  impede  the  progress  of  change  into 
the  chrysalis,  but  likewise  occasion  the  death  of  the  insect ; 
that  this  vegetating  process  thus  commences  during  the  life- 
time of  the  insect,  appears  certain  from  the  fact  of  the 
caterpillar,  when  converted  into  a plant,  always  preserving 
its  perfect  form  : in  no  one  instance  does  decomposition 
appear  to  have  commenced,  or  the  skin  to  have  contracted 
or  expanded  beyond  its  natural  size. 

A plant  of  a similar  kind  was  presented  to  me  in  1837,  by 
Mr.  John  Allan,  who  discovered  it  growing  in  abundance 
on  the  banks  of  the  Murrumbidgee,  in  a rich  black  alluvial 
soil ; the  insect  in  some  specimens  was  six  inches  long,  and 
the  plant  about  the  same  length,  springing  like  the  New 
Zealand  one  from  the  nape  of  the  neck ; in  form  it  is  quite 
different  from  the  other,  having  a thick  stem,  crowned  at  the 
top  with  a fringe,  which,  when  expanded,  assumes  the 
appearance  of  a full  blown  flower  upon  the  surface  of  the 
soil,  the  rest  being  buried  in  the  ground : this  top  is  of  a 
velvety  brown  texture ; many  similar  ones  were  found  in  the 
same  locality,  and  numerous  empty  shells  and  holes  in  the 
vicinity ; at  night,  the  number  of  large  brown  moths  was  so 
great  as  more  than  once  to  extinguish  my  friend's  lamp  ; I 
sent  it  to  Sir  W.  Hooker,  who  has  named  it  Sphceria  Taylori . 

I have  also  met  with  alarge  kind  of  beetle,  the  “ mumutaua,” 
abounding  amongst  the  sandhills  in  the  vicinity  of  the  sea, 
which  frequently  undergoes  the  same  vegetative  change ; the 
body  being  completely  filled  with  this  nutlike  substance;  but 
in  no  instanee  have  I noticed  any  plant  shooting  from  it. 
A similar  caterpillar  to  the  aweto  has  been  found  at  Tara- 


650 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


naki,  which  perfectly  changes  into  a vegetable  substance,  but 
likewise  wants  the  bulrush ; this  was  dug  up  in  great  num- 
bers in  the  garden  of  J.  Wicksteed,  Esq.,  at  New  Plymouth ; 
a specimen  of  cicada  was  brought  to  me  which  had  undergone 
this  change,  and  had  also  a perfect  plant  growing  from  its 
neck,  very  much  resembling  a small  white  fungus  found 
on  decayed  wood ; this  I named  after  its  finder,  Sphceria 
Basilii;  insects  having  a vegetative  process  of  a similar  kind, 
have  been  discovered  in  other  parts  of  the  world;  and, 
probably,  when  the  flora  of  each  country  is  more  carefully 
examined,  will  be  found  existing  in  most  of  them. 

Attwood,  in  his  history  of  Dominica,  gives  the  following 
account  of  a vegetable  fly  found  in  that  island  : — " It  is  of  the 
appearance  and  size  of  a small  cockchafer,  and  buries  itself 
in  the  ground,  where  it  dies  : and  from  its  body  springs  up  a 
small  plant,  which  resembles  a young  coffee-tree,  only  that  its 
leaves  are  smaller ; it  is  often  over-looked  from  the  supposi- 
tion people  have  of  its  being  none  other,  but  on  examining 
it  properly,  the  difference  is  easily  distinguished — the  head, 
body,  and  feet  of  the  insect  appearing  at  the  root  as  perfect 
as  when  alive.” 

In  the  American  Philosophical  Transactions , the  Rev. 
Nicholas  Collins  describes  “ a certain  zoophyton  in  the  Ohio 
county/'’  which  he  declares  is  both  vegetable  and  animal ; for 
having  crawled  about  the  woods  in  its  animal  state  till  it 
grows  weary  of  that  mode  of  existence,  it  fixes  itself  in  the 
ground,  and  becomes  a stately  plant,  with  a stem  issuing  out 
of  its  mouth. 

A small  vegetating  caterpillar  is  also  found  in  Britain,  the 
sphceria  entomorhiza.  The  Chinese  also  have  a similar  plant, 
sphceria  sinensis,  called  by  them  hea  tsaou  tungehung,  or  the 
summer  vegetable  winter  insect.  In  Van  Diemen’s  Land 
there  is  a vegetating  caterpillar,  sphceria  Gunnii ; it  some- 
what resembles  the  New  Zealand  one,  from  which  it  chiefly 
differs  in  having  the  stem  of  its  vegetating  process  thicker 
than  the  insect  from  which  it  arises. 

A Polistes  attacked  by  many  kinds  of  a filamentous 
sph  seria  was  described  by  Felton  in  the  Philosophical  Trans- 


VITALITY. 


651 


actions  under  the  name  of  vespa  crinita,  which  he  regarded 
as  a new  species  of  hairy  wasp,  not  being  aware  that  it  was 
a sphseria. 

Several  kinds  of  moths,  both  English  and  foreign,  especi- 
ally from  the  Brazils,  are  found  thus  attacked,  also  ants 
and  curculionidge  from  St.  VincenPs,  and  the  papa  of  the 
cicada,  splicer  id  sobolifera. 

At  the  Bristol  Association  for  the  Cultivation  of  Science, 
held  in  August,  1836,  a paper  was  read  by  J.  B.  Yates, 
Esq.,  on  the  vegetating  wasp  in  the  West  Indies,  in  which 
the  author  was  likewise  of  opinion  that  the  vegetating  process 
commenced  during  the  life  of  the  insect ; and,  certainly,  a 
careful  examination  of  these  singular  caterpillars  favors  the 
hypothesis.  If  this  should  be  the  case,  it  is  an  instance  of 
a retrograde  step  in  nature,  when  the  insect,  instead  of 
rising  to  the  higher  order  of  the  butterfly,  and  soaring  to 
the  skies,  sinks  into  a plant,  and  remains  attached  to  the 
soil  in  which  it  has  buried  itself. 


Vitality. 

The  vitality  of  the  unio  is  extraordinary ; at  Liverpool,  in 
New  South  Wales,  Colonel  Phelps,  a great  lover  of  nature, 
brought  me  several  live  unios,  which  he  said  were  taken 
out  of  a dry  bank  many  feet  above  the  level  of  the  water 
which  had  never  reached  the  spot  in  the  memory  of  the 
oldest  settler  ; as  I appeared  rather  incredulous,  it  was 
proposed  that  we  should  take  a walk  together  to  the  place 
from  whence  they  were  taken. 

The  country  about  Liverpool  is  a dead  flat,  and  in  the  part 
we  visited  was  intersected  by  a tolerably  deep  ravine  or  water- 
course, which  in  dry  weather  is  merely  a chain  of  ponds,  and 
it  is  rarely  in  a climate  like  that  of  Australia  there  is  ever 
sufficient  rain  to  cause  a running  stream ; in  the  bank,  about 
two  feet  below  the  level  of  the  surrounding  country,  on  which 
my  friend^s  house  stood,  he  pointed  out  a bed  of  mussel 
shells,  which  seemed  to  have  been  deposited  there  by  some 


652 


VITALITY. 


extraordinary  high  flood,  and  then  covered  with  a stratum  of 
soil  to  the  depth  stated ; that  this  had  been  at  a very  distant 
period  was  to  be  inferred,  not  only  by  the  surface  being 
well  grassed  over,  but  by  houses  and  plantations  having  been 
also  erected  upon  it ; from  it  I soon  extracted  a number  of 
live  unios. 

I carried  half-a-dozen  away,  and  placed  them  on  a shelf 
in  my  study,  and  about  two  years  after  I took  them  with  me 
to  New  Zealand ; on  arriving  there,  I mentioned  the  circum- 
stance to  one  of  our  members,  and  gave  the  shells  to  him, 
he  appeared  incredulous,  but  placed  them  on  the  wet  soil  by 
the  side  of  the  mill  dam ; the  next  morning  he  came  and  told 
me,  to  his  surprise  he  found  that  the  shells  had  opened  and  the 
fish  were  quite  alive,  he  therefore  threw  them  into  the  water. 

When  I was  living  in  New  South  Wales  there  had  been  a 
long  continued  drought,  and  a large  sheet  of  water,  called 
Lake  George,  was  so  completely  dried  up,  that  the  drays 
made  a short  cut  through  it,  and  the  drivers  dug  holes  by 
the  roadside  to  obtain  water,  in  them  they  frequently  found 
large  live  fish  encased  in  the  dry  soil,  and  doubtless  numbers 
retained  their  vitality  until  the  bed  became  again  covered 
with  water. 

Nor  is  this  vitality  confined  to  the  inhabitants  of  fresh 
water,  but  extends  to  marine  shell-fish  as  well.  I buried  a 
number  in  my  garden,  the  more  easily  to  get  rid  of  the  fish ; 
after  being  in  the  ground  for  about  a month  I disinterred 
them,  and  found,  to  my  surprise,  that  most  were  still  alive. 

My  friend,  already  alluded  to,  said  he  had  been  commis- 
sioned by  a great  conchologist  to  send  him  a cask  filled  with 
shells  just  as  they  were  taken  from  the  rocks  and  shore,  and 
that  many  of  those  were  alive  when  they  reached  England. 

This  tenacity  of  life  also  extends  to  trees.  Seeds  will 
remain  in  the  soil  for  ages  without  losing  the  vital  principle. 
Hazle-nuts  have  been  dug  up  in  the  fens,  which  have  grown 
when  planted ; forests  have  been  cut  down,  and  succeeded 
by  trees  of  different  kinds  to  those  which  fell  under  the  axe, 
but  probably  identical  with  those  which  preceded  them,  and 
in  my  garden,  the  sheltered  sides  of  a melon  pit  were  found. 


VITALITY. 


653 


soon  after  it  was  dug,  covered  with  a thick  growth  of  ferns, 
and  that  spot  is  now  occupied  by  a clump  of  fine  fern  trees, 
the  cyathea  medularis,  and  in  a cave  which  was  cut  in  the 
neighbouring  cliff,  composed  of  a similar  soft  sandstone, 
which  had  evidently  been  upheaved  from  the  lower  level,  a 
like  growth  of  ferns  soon  appeared  in  the  most  humid  part ; 
in  fact,  when  we  repeatedly  hear  of  live  toads  and  other 
reptiles  being  encased  in  blocks  of  stone  taken  from  our  coal 
measures,  there  is  no  assigning  a limit  to  the  period  of  vitality 
in  either  the  animal  or  vegetable  kingdoms. 


SPHCERIA,  OR  VEGETATING  CATERPILLARS. 


MISSION  HOUSE,  PUTIKI,  WANGANUI. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

IGNIS  FATUUS. 

In  travelling  through  the  dense  forest  which  extends  from 
Kaitaia  to  Waimate,  near  the  Bay  of  Islands,  I encamped  one 
extremely  rainy  night  on  a small  open  spot  by  the  side  of  a 
stream.  The  natives  who  accompanied  me,  soon  erected  a 
large  commodious  shed,  which  they  roofed  with  palm  leaves, 
and  rendered  quite  impervious  to  the  rain ; the  sides  of  the 
building  were  thatched  with  the  same ; along  the  front,  which 
was  left  open,  a line  of  fires  soon  warmed  our  shivering 
company. 

No  sooner  had  my  companions  composed  themselves  to 


IGNIS  FATUUS. 


655 


sleep,  and  the  fires  began  to  die  away,  than  I observed  a 
light  in  the  corner  of  the  hnt  next  to  me,  like  the  moon 
shining  through  a chink ; surprised  at  the  sight,  as  it  was  a 
rainy,  moonless  night,  and  very  dark,  I got  up  to  examine 
the  cause ; the  object  which  attracted  my  attention  appeared 
to  be  a globe  of  pale  light,  attached  to  the  point  of  a palm 
leaf,  which  hung  from  the  roof;  whilst  steadily  regarding 
this  curious  sight,  I was  still  further  surprised  by  seeing  a 
ball  of  light  come  slowly  sailing  into  the  shed,  where  it  was 
arrested  in  its  course  by  the  wet  sleeve  of  a shirt  hung  up  to 
dry,  to  which  it  attached  itself ; it  was  not  a quivering  light, 
but  pale  and  steady ; the  air  seemed  charged  with  these  lumi- 
nous vapours,  for  while  regarding  the  two  in  the  shed,  a series 
of  them  floated  past,  at  an  elevation  of  about  a yard  from  the 
ground.  The  first  I noticed  had  a globular  form,  having  a 
brighter  spot  in  the  centre,  or,  more  generally,  at  one  extre- 
mity ; sometimes  there  were  two  globes,  one  about  two  feet 
from  the  other,  connected  by  a luminous  band ; at  others,  the 
lights  appeared  like  little  clouds,  rendering  the  trees  near 
them  visible ; then  they  resembled  rods,  about  four  feet  in 
length,  moving  perpendicularly  to  the  earth,  and  parallel  to 
each  other.  I counted  as  many  as  a dozen  of  these  luminous 
rods  at  once,  and  seldom  less  than  half  that  number ; they 
all  invariably  moved  in  the  same  direction ; at  one  time,  the 
surface  of  the  earth  was,  for  a few  feet,  completely  illuminated; 
after  watching  them  for  a long  time,  until  the  eyes  were 
wearied,  I laid  down,  when  I noticed  that  the  lights  were 
more  visible  than  when  I stood  up,  which  might  arise  from 
their  being  so  near  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  my  seeing 
under  them. 

In  returning  again  through  the  same  forest,  I had  another 
opportunity  of  observing  the  Ignis  Fatuus  in  the  same  place ; 
it  was  then  a beautiful  moonlight  night;  but,  from  the 
denseness  of  the  forest,  little  benefit  was  derived  from  its 
rays;  in  this  instance,  there  were  two  lights  hovering  over 
the  river,  about  two  feet  from  its  surface  ; they  were 
nearly  stationary,  and  shone  so  brightly  that,  although  the 
natives  were  engaged  in  fishing  with  lighted  brands,  they 


656 


IGNIS  FATUUS. 


were  not  eclipsed.  In  that  neighbourhood  there  are  many 
large  kauri  pines,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  decom- 
posed remains  of  those  highly  resinous  trees  had  something 
to  do  with  this  phenomenon. 

The  Fens  in  the  Isle  of  Ely  and  Lincolnshire  were  formerly 
as  notorious  for  their  unwholesome  fogs  and  miasma,  as  for 
the  frequent  appearance  of  the  Ignis  Fatuus,  which  might  be 
seen  in  all  directions  nearly  every  dark  night ; of  late  years, 
it  has  been  more  rarely  observed,  and  during  the  time  I held 
a curacy  in  the  heart  of  the  Fens,*  a period  of  more  than  five 
years,  I only  noticed  it  twice. 

On  one  of  those  occasions,  a dark  rainy  night,  in  return- 
ing home  from  my  distant  church  in  the  Fens,  I had  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  this  singular  light ; at  first,  I took  it 
for  a man  with  a lantern,  and  being  anxious  to  share  the 
benefit  of  it,  as  well  as  gain  a companion,  I quickened  my 
steps  to  get  up  with  him,  walking  through  thick  and  thin — 
for  the  road  was  deep  in  mud,  but  I seemed  to  get  no  nearer, 
the  light  still  kept  at  the  same  distance  from  me,  I there- 
fore stood  still,  and  listened  whether  I could  hear  any 
footsteps,  and  was  then  surprised  to  see  the  light  dancing 
about,  from  one  side  of  the  road  to  the  other,  sometimes 
sinking  to  the  level  of  the  earth,  and  then  rising  to  a 
height  of  eight  or  ten  feet ; it  was  now  evident  that  it 
was  the  Ignis  Fatuus ; anxious  to  examine  it  more  closely, 
I stood  still,  when  the  light  approached,  gradually  increas- 
ing in  size,  appearing  and  disappearing  every  instant ; 
its  quivering  and  vibratory  motion  most  resembled  that 
of  a sheet  of  gold  leaf ; in  a little  time  it  divided  itself  into 
two  parts,  one  remaining  on  one  side  of  the  road,  which 
was  bordered  with  broad  ditches,  the  other  on  the  opposite 
side,  leaving  a thin  streak  of  light  between,  and  then  uniting 
again  in  a moment,  flowing  together  like  oil ; at  last,  it 
approached  so  near  as  to  appear  almost  equal  in  size  to  the 
full  moon,  having  a globular  form,  and  emitting  a light 
sufficient  to  render  a gate  which  stood  near  perfectly  visi- 
ble ; it  advanced  so  rapidly,  that  it  was  rather  startling, 

* Coveney  and  Manea,  in  the  Isle  of  Ely,  then  a complete  Missionary  post. 


IGNIS  FATUUS. 


657 


and  distinctly  touched  my  cheek,  upon  which  I felt  a sensible 
glow ; but  my  breath  made  it  bound  away  again  to  a con- 
siderable distance. 

It  is  probable  that  the  Ignis  Fatuus  is  simply  a luminous 
gas  or  phosphoric  light,  arising  from  the  oily  particles  of 
decomposed  aquatic  plants  floating  on  the  surface  of  the 
drains,  and  that  it  is  so  feeble  as  only  to  be  visible  on  the 
darkest  and  dampest  nights ; or  from  the  decomposition  of 
the  many  resinous  pine  trees  which  once  grew  there,  and 
whose  remains  still  lie  buried  in  the  peat ; by  some  this  is 
said  to  be  carburetted  or  phosphoretted  hydrogen,  and  is 
termed  marsh  gas.  Several  kinds  of  decayed  wood  acquire 
this  phosphorescent  appearance,  especially  if  buried  in  wet 
situations,  portions  of  such  in  the  dark  appear  like  a mass  of 
pale  flame. 

I well  remember  a story  of  a lad  in  the  Fens,  who  was  sent 
to  milk  the  cows  : as  he  was  returning,  he  saw  “ Will  o*  the 
Wisp,”  as  it  is  commonly  called,  which  he  took  for  some 
supernatural  face  staring  at  him  ; this  so  alarmed  him  that 
he  laid  himself  down  with  his  face  to  the  ground,  where  he 
remained  for  some  time ; at  last,  venturing  to  look  up,  and 
finding  the  dreaded  form  had  disappeared,  he  ran  home, 
leaving  his  milk  pails  behind  him.  I have  only  once  heard 
of  this  light  settling  fixedly  on  any  object,  excepting  on  the 
occasion  already  stated  in  the  New  Zealand  forest.  The 
Rector  of  Coveney  was  driving  home  one  dark  rainy  night 
from  Ely,  when  he  saw  a light  on  the  other  side  of  the  hedge, 
which  he  thought  at  first  proceeded  from  a lantern,  but  it 
immediately  came  and  attached  itself  to  the  ears  of  his  horse 
in  the  form  of  two  globules,  where  it  remained  several  minutes. 

The  lights  of  St.  Elmo,  or  corpus  sanctum , commonly  called 
by  sailors  cormorzants,  which  are  said  to  be  blue  flames,  like 
those  of  candles,  are  not  unfrequently  seen  at  the  mast  head, 
generally  during  a storm  or  soon  after  one.  The  Master  of  the 
brig  Venture } of  Wanganui,  noticed  as  many  as  five  luminous 
balls  at  once,  settling  on  different  parts  of  the  rigging ; the 
mate  was  bold  enough  to  climb  up,  and  touch  them,  he 
said  they  were  merely  luminous  bubbles,  which  burst  when 

u u 


658 


OCEAN  LIGHT. 


touched,  and  the  lights  were  immediately  extinguished  ; 
these  marine  lights  most  probably  arise  from  the  decomposed 
remains  of  fish,  raised  to  the  surface  by  the  violent  motion 
of  the  water  in  storms  ; in  the  same  way  at  Kaitaia,  lights 
were  observed  hovering  over  the  graves  of  several  recently- 
interred  corpses,  especially  on  one  of  an  unusually  large  and 
corpulent  native. 

Ocean  Light. 

The  wonderful  arrangement  of  solar  light  by  which  each 
part  of  the  earth's  surface  enjoys  its  fair  share,  is  only  equalled 
by  the  distribution  of  heat.  The  way  warm  currents  are 
directed  from  the  hottest  regions  to  the  coldest,  whilst  the 
frigid  ones  flow  to  the  equatorial  seas  as  an  equalizing  medium, 
is  also  surprising.  This  of  late  has  been  denied,  the  power 
of  the  gulf  stream  has  been  controverted ; it  is  said  there  is 
no  sufficient  reason  assigned  for  its  generation  in  the  gulf,  or 
current  powerful  enough  to  cause  the  grand  effects  attributed 
to  it,  still  a strong  one  is  found  running  at  the  rate  of  four 
knots  an  hour,  and  it  certainly  reaches  the  western  shores  of 
the  British  Isles,  moderates  the  cold  which  their  latitude 
would  otherwise  cause  them  to  suffer,  for  even  there  the  cold 
is  far  less  on  the  side  bordering  the  Atlantic  than  on  that 
adjoining  the  German  Ocean.  Tropical  seeds  are  also  con- 
stantly drifted  up  on  the  western  shores  which  are  not  found 
on  the  eastern;  the  current,  commonly  called  the  gulf  stream, 
may  not  take  its  rise  in  the  place  assigned,  but  further 
south,  and  the  region  of  gulf  weed  may  be  occasioned  by 
that  current,  being  in  fact  its  slack  water,  still  the  stream 
is  certainly  there.  As  in  the  Mediterranean  there  is  said  to 
be  an  upper  and  lower  stream,  the  former  constantly  flowing 
in  from  the  Atlantic,  the  latter  flowing  out,  so  in  the  entire 
ocean  there  may  be  alternate  hot  and  cold  currents  at  various 
depths,  as  is  now  found  to  be  the  case  in  the  atmosphere  at 
different  elevations.  The  equanimity  and  mildness  of  the 
New  Zealand  climate  may  be  in  a great  measure  attributed 
to  a similar  cause  as  that  of  Great  Britain ; there  are  seeds 


OCEAN  LIGHT. 


659 


picked  up  on  either  side  of  the  island,  which  are  identical 
with  those  belonging  to  the  tropical  islands,  lying  to  the 
N.  E.  and  N.  W.  of  New  Zealand,  showing  there  are  other 
causes  than  latitude  aiding  to  give  it  that  climatic  superiority, 
by  which  it  is  so  greatly  distinguished. 

The  late  deep  sea  soundings  are  opening  up  another  chapter 
in  the  history  of  the  ocean's  depths.  Dr.  Carpenter,  who  has 
dredged  to  the  depth  2400  fathoms,  or  more  than  two-and- 
a-half  miles,  asserts  that  the  temperature  diminishes  with  the 
depth,  so  that  arctic  cold  reigns  where  the  sea  attains  its 
greatest  profundity,  and  no  life  can  exist,  but  only  perhaps  a 
stratum  of  ice  at  its  lowest  bottom.  This,  however,  remains 
to  be  proved,  future  researches  may  be  found  to  produce  a 
different  result.  The  deep  sea  soundings,  taken  from  almost 
every  part,  were  submitted  to  Professor  Huxley's  inspection 
by  the  Admiralty,  and  after  careful  examination  he  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  there  was  a gigantic  band  of  life  encircling  the 
globe  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  and  that  there  is  a creta- 
ceous formation  going  on  there,  the  same  as  that  which 
existed  millions  of  years  ago. 

In  corroboration  of  this  statement,  Sir  James  Ross,  in  his 
South  Antarctic  Expedition,  at  a depth  of  400  fathoms,  in 
the  vicinity  of  Mount  Erebus,  dredged  up  delicate  fragile 
shells,  and  what  was  still  more  extraordinary,  corals,  which 
are  supposed  to  be  confined  to  tropical  seas,  proving  that 
even  in  the  arctic  zone  the  ocean  bottom  has  its  inhabitants, 
and  those  of  a character  requiring  heat ; whilst  the  fragile 
nature  of  some  also  tend  to  show  there  is  a counteracting 
power  which  deprives  the  ocean  depths  of  that  great  weight 
and  pressure  which  are  ascribed  to  them. 

It  is  considered  an  established  fact  that  on  land  the  tem- 
perature increases  in  the  ratio  of  one  degree  for  every  sixty 
feet  of  depth,  so  that  if  an  artesian  well  were  to  be  sunk 
2400  fathoms  deep,  boiling  water  would  be  obtained ; this 
might  be  thought  to  hold  good  with  the  ocean,  were  it 
not  for  such  disturbing  causes  as  coJd  currents  rushing  in, 
and  moderating  the  natural  heat  of  those  depths,  still,  it  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  heat  which  escapes  from  the 

u u 2 


660 


OCEAN  LIGHT. 


earth's  crust  at  2400  fathoms  must  produce  some  important 
effects,  it  would  tend  to  diminish  the  extreme  pressure  of  the 
ocean,  so  that  it  may  not  he  more  felt  there  than  we  feel  that 
of  the  air  on  the  earth's  surface. 

In  some  of  those  deep  sea  soundings,  asterias  have  been 
brought  up  of  as  bright  a color  as  those  found  on  our  shores, 
this  leads  to  another  consideration,  could  a bright  red  color 
be  produced  in  that  total  darkness  which  is  thought  to 
reign  there  as  well  as  intense  cold?  can  life  exist  and  in- 
crease without  light  ? is  it  not  of  vital  importance  to  it  ? but 
there  is  life  found  in  ocean's  lowest  bottom,  therefore  it 
is  highly  probable  there  is  light  there  as  well  as  heat,  which 
if  not  generated  by  the  latter  or  by  electricity,  or  both 
combined,  may  be  derived  from  the  immense  quantity  of 
phosphoric  matter  there  held  in  solution  from  decomposed 
organisms,  which  are  constantly  forming  vast  strata  along 
the  ocean  bottom,  as  in  the  primaeval  one  of  old.  With 
the  phosphoresence  of  the  ocean  we  are  familiar,  but  is 
that  confined  to  its  surface  only  ? It  is  a well  known  fact 
that  after  great  storms  masses  of  this  luminous  matter, 
this  ignis  fatuus  of  the  ocean,  are  released  from  greater 
depths,  which  often  attach  themselves  to  the  yard  arms 
of  ships;  though  a severe  storm  may  agitate  the  sea  to 
a greater  depth  than  usual,  and  thus  release  small  portions 
of  this  luminous  matter,  still  it  must  be  but  trifling  com- 
pared with  that  existing  in  the  vast  profound,  there, 
everything  is  quiet,  no  disturbance,  except  what  may  arise 
from  currents,  hence  at  great  depths  the  quantity  of  phos- 
phoric light  must  be  very  great,  and  go  on  increasing  with 
the  depth,  so  that  at  the  lowest  bottom  who  can  say  what 
is  the  degree  of  light  which  may  there  be  possessed.  It  is 
supposed  there  may  be  some  connection  between  ozone  and 
the  phosphoresence  of  the  sea,  this  when  further  searched 
into,  may  lead  to  fresh  and  important  results,  which  will 
eventually  give  correcter  views  on  various  points  connected 
with  this  interesting  subject. 

The  luminous  character  of  fresh  water  has  also  been 
repeatedly  observed  in  different  parts  of  New  Zealand, 


TIHE  MAORI — SNEEZING. 


661 


especially  in  the  Wanganui  River.  In  poling  up  the  stream, 
Mr.  Booth  frequently  noticed  it,  particularly  in  one  spot 
about  half-a-mile  before  he  reached  Pipiriki ; the  phos- 
phorescence seemed  to  come  up  with  the  pole.  I noticed 
that  the  rocks  at  the  bottom  of  the  river  were  covered  with 
a gelatinous  vegetable  substance,  of  a dark  green  color,  and 
globular  form,  some  an  inch-and-a-half  in  circumference, 
these  are  luminous  and  detached  by  the  pole,  this  is  the  more 
probable  as  the  light  seemed  to  proceed  from  detached  points. 

In  a small  lake  on  the  north  shore  at  Auckland,  there 
are  pure  white  gelatinous  substances,  about  half-an-inch  in 
diameter,  which  are  also  luminous,  as  well  as  a small  slug 
which  abounds  in  the  same  lake. 

Tihe  Maori — Sneezing. 

Maori  ora}  an  exclamation  used  when  any  one  sneezes, 
meaning,  good  health  to  you.  It  is  remarkable  how  many 
nations  have  similar  expressions.  Sneezing  appears  to  have 
been  always  regarded  as  a sign  of  health,  even  from  the 
remotest  times,  (2  Kings  iv.  35.).  In  the  same  way  we 
say,  God  bless  you,  so  also  the  French,  Le  Dieu  vous  be- 
nisse,  the  exclamation  of  the  Italians  is  felicita,  with  the 
Romans  of  old,  salvere  jusserunt,  and  with  the  Greeks, 
fascrocrov,  God  save  you.  Tihe  mauri,  tupu  mauri  roa  ki  te 
wai  ao,  ki  te  ao  marama,  Tihe  mauri  roa,  let  a natural  sneeze 
be  natural  health  and  long  life  in  this  bright  world,  therefore, 
sneeze  away ; this  was  used  as  a spell  when  a mother  heard 
her  child  sneeze. 

Rain. 

The  natives  of  Wanganui  and  the  interior  have  an  idea 
that  if  the  monoa  bushes  are  used  to  cook  by,  it  will  cause 
rain  ; this  is  an  epacris  which  grows  abundantly  on  the 
central  plains,  and  is  said  to  be  the  parent  of  all  trees,  or 
the  first  that  was  formed ; at  Pipiriki  there  is  a mountain, 
on  the  side  of  which  is  a remarkable  fissure  of  great  length, 
and  of  two  or  three  feet  in  width,  as  though  the  side  of  the 


662 


ADAM  AND  EYE. 


mountain  had  slipped  down;  this  is  used,  or  rather  was 
formerly,  as  a burial  place ; at  one  end  the  Chiefs  and  great 
men  were  thrown  down,  and  at  the  other  slaves  and  per- 
sons of  no  consequence ; an  idea  prevailed,  that  if  any  one, 
especially  a stranger,  ascended  this  mountain,  it  was  sure  to 
rain  ; this  was  mentioned  by  the  teacher,  Hamuera,  as  we 
started  to  visit  their  ancient  place  of  sepulture ; of  course,  I 
told  him  it  was  an  idle  fancy,  to  which  he  assented ; the  day 
was  fine,  indeed  cloudless,  when  we  commenced  the  ascent, 
but  before  we  had  reached  half  the  way  up  it  set  in  heavy  rain ; 
the  teacher  turned  round  and  looked  at  me,  but  said  nothing. 
The  same  idea  exists  in  Peru. 

Adam  and  Eve. 

The  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  given  of  Adam  and  Eve  recently 
found  in  the  temple  of  Philoe,  represents  most  clearly  our  first 
parents,  with  the  serpent  at  the  base  of  the  tree  looking  up 
to  Eve.  Adam  seems  to  be  returning  from  tilling  the  garden, 
with  some  tool  or  implement  of  husbandry  in  his  hand  ; the 
first  work  given  him  to  do  when  placed  in  Paradise,  was 
“ to  dress  it,  and  to  keep  it This  hieroglyphic  is  therefore 
singularly  faithful,  and  establishes  the  fact  that  the  Egyp- 
tians were  early  acquainted  with  the  scriptural  narrative,  and 
it  is  not  improbable  also  with  its  general  outlines,  before  the 
time  when  Moses  was  inspired  to  write  it,  and  that  it  forms 
a portion  of  the  original  tradition  handed  down  to  them  from 
the  patriarchal  times.* 

Steatite. 

The  soap  stone  is  a soft  unctious  substance,  or  earth,  found 
in  various  parts,  generally  of  a yellow  color,  I chiefly  met 
with  it  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  on  the  Kiri  kiri  river ; formerly, 
in  times  of  dearth,  it  was  eaten  j the  same  as  is  done  by  the 
Carribees,  who  are  accustomed  to  prepare  it  as  a regular 
article  for  winter  consumption. 


* See  page  61. 


MAGNETIC  IRON  SAND. 


663 


Magnetic  Ikon  Sand. 

This  valuable  mineral  abounds  in  New  Zealand  on  the 
banks  of  our  rivers  and  shores,,  at  the  base  of  our  volcanic 
mountains,  from  whence  probably  it  originally  came  ; in  the 
north  it  is  found  in  large  grains  of  great  lustre,  imbedded  in 
yellow  ochre ; when  acted  upon  by  water  it  forms  a conglo- 
merate in  large  masses.  Great  quantities  of  this  iron  sand  are 
thrown  up  on  the  Taranaki  and  Wanganui  beaches,  it  consists 
of  peroxide  and  protoxide  of  iron  mixed,  containing  about  71 
per  cent,  of  iron,  and  is  the  most  valuable  of  iron  ores  ; the 
celebrated  Swedish  iron,  in  such  high  repute  for  making  steel, 
is  obtained  from  a mineral  of  precisely  the  same  character. 

Working  Green  Stone. 

Next  to  the  diamond,  this  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult 
stone  to  cut,  still  the  Maori  can  work  it  into  neck  and  ear 
ornaments,  as  well  as  meres,  chisels,  adzes,  tokis,  &c.,  he 
saws  it  by  rubbing  the  edge  of  one  slab  on  another,  and 
for  this  purpose  suspends  a calabash  of  water,  with  a small 
hole  in  the  bottom,  over  the  stone  he  is  working,  so  that  it 
drops  continuously,  but  slowly,  he  then  takes  some  of  the 
finest  quartz  sand,  which  he  continually  adds  to  the  groove 
he  is  making,  thus  by  patience  and  perseverance  he  succeeds 
in  sawing  it  up  ; to  drill  a hole,  he  ties  a small  piece  of 
basalt  or  obsidian  firmly  to  the  end  of  a stick,  the  sides  of 
which  are  weighted  with  two  heavy  stones ; attacked  to  the 
other  end  of  the  stick  is  a string,  by  which  it  is  made  to 
revolve,  and  to  keep  the  point  of  the  instrument  constantly 
on  the  same  spot,  a piece  of  perforated  wood  is  placed  over 
it ; thus  ornaments  in  the  shape  of  human  figures  are  formed. 

Manna. 

The  Leptospermum  Scopiarum,  Manuka , or  Kahi  katoa 
trees,  in  some  localities  produce  this  substance  in  consider- 
able quantities,  it  is  generally  formed  on  the  bark,  and 
especially  at  the  fork  of  a twig,  otherwise  it  drops  on  any 


664 


COUNTING. 


branch  or  leaf  beneath  it ; this  substance  is  greedily  eaten 
by  the  natives;  on  the  eastern  shores  of  Taupo  Lake,  it  is 
found  in  great  abundance,  in  taste  it  resembles  that  of  manna 
in  general,  or  rather  it  may  be  said  to  have  no  particular 
flavor,  being  merely  like  sugar. 

In  Australia,  the  manna  produced  by  one  of  the  Eucalypti, 
which,  by  way  of  distinction,  has  been  named  the  Manna- 
bearing gum  tree,  is  found  in  round  circular  bodies,  closely 
resembling  Coriander  comfits  ; these  are  largely  strewed  on 
the  ground,  and  if  not  gathered  early  in  the  morning,  are 
almost  sure  to  disappear  in  a very  short  time,  being  carried 
off  by  myriads  of  ants,  and  it  is  highly  probable  they  are  the 
producers  of  it  by  puncturing  the  leaves.  In  New  Zealand 
the  cause  of  its  formation  is  owing  to  a small  grub,  which 
forms  its  paths  between  the  bark  and  the  wood,  its  little 
tracks  become  so  many  ducts  for  the  sap,  which  is  speedily 
crystalized  by  the  action  of  the  sun.  It  is  observable  that  the 
manna-bearing  gum,  when  raised  in  New  Zealand,  continues 
to  produce  it,  but  not  in  the  same  way  from  the  leaves,  but 
like  that  of  the  manuka,  probably  from  the  worm  supplying 
the  place  of  the  ants.  I have  noticed  a kind  of  manna  in 
New  Zealand  on  the  branches  of  the  weeping  willow,  where 
the  worm  had  been  at  work,  but  the  quantity  of  saccharine 
matter  being  too  small  to  crystalize,  it  merely  becomes  a 
sweet  syrup. 

Counting. 

The  old  Maori  way  of  counting  was  evidently  at  first  by 
the  fingers  up  to  ten,  then  a shake  of  both  hands  were  given 
which  signified  one  ten,  this  was  called  a nga  hum,  or  the 
entire  ten  fingers ; one  hand  being  shaken  implied  five,  or  the 
half ; ten  shakes  of  the  two  were  one  hundred,  and  so  on. 

Thus,  ko  tahi  was  one  finger,  ha  rua  two,  ka  tom  three, 
ka  iva  four,  ka  rima  five,  ka  ono  six,  ka  witu  seven,  ka  warn 
eight,  ka  iwa  nine,  ka  te  kau  ten ; then  a shake  of  the  hands 
was  given,  this  was  nga  hum , the  whole  ten  fingers ; tekau 
ma  tahi  eleven,  tekau  ma  rua  twelve,  &c. ; ma  te  kau  twenty, 
and  so  on  to  ko  tahi  rau  one  hundred,  and  ko  tahi  mano  one 


CLIMATE. 


665 


thousand,  beyond  that  all  numbers  were  memo  tini  tint,  many 
thousands. 

The  shakes  of  the  hands  were  expressed  by  tatau,  to  count. 
Unless  they  added  taki  tahi , once  told  to  these  shakes,  they 
meant  double,  thus  ko  tahi  ran  would  signify  two  hundred, 
unless  they  said  ko  tahi  ran  taki  tahi3  a hundred  once  told. 
Pu  also  signifies  counting  by  pairs,  unless  qualified  by  the 
word  topu,  thus  ko  tahi  pu  topic  is  simply  two,  but  e rua  pu 
is  two  pairs,  or  four,  nga  huru  ten,  is  thus  twenty.  The  word 
hoko  signifies  the  doubling  of  twenty,  as  nga  hoko  rua , forty  ; 
nga  hoko  torn , sixty,  nga  hoko  tekau , two  hundred. 

To  count  a war  party  of  three  hundred  and  forty  men,  a 
native  would  not  say,  e torn  rau  e wa  te  kau,  three  hundred  and 
forty,  but  ko  tahi  rau  hoko  witu , one  hundred  doubled,  and 
seven  twenties  ; topu  also  signifies  a pair  doubled,  or  four. 

Climate. 

The  Climate  of  New  Zealand  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  mildest 
in  the  world,  certainly  the  most  so  of  all  the  colonies  belong- 
ing to  Great  Britain ; extending  for  more  than  a thousand 
miles,  from  latitude  34°  to  47°,  in  the  form  of  a long  curve,  its 
northern  termination  being  in  the  parallel  of  Sydney,  and 
its  southern  one  beyond  that  of  Van  Diemen's  Land,  it  has 
throughout  an  equableness  of  climate  which  is  remarkable;  the 
general  width  of  the  isles  not  being  commensurate  with  their 
length,  causes  the  sea  to  have  great  power  in  reducing  the 
heat  of  summer  and  the  cold  of  winter : the  warmest  part 
has  not  the  heat  of  Sydney,  nor  yet  the  cold  winds  there 
felt ; the  most  southerly  part  has  still  the  fern-tree  flourish- 
ing in  all  its  luxuriance,  and  its  forests  retain  their  summer 
foliage ; whilst  the  continent  of  Australia  is  remarkably 
deficient  in  springs  and  streams,  and  liable  to  frequent 
droughts,  New  Zealand,  intercepting  the  clouds  from  the 
oast,  has  a never-failing  supply  of  moisture,  which  insures  its 
fertility  and  certainty  of  crops.  This  may  account  in  some 
measure  for  the  extreme  aridity  of  Australia  and  the  humidity 
of  New  Zealand  : it  is  indeed  a land  of  rivers  and  springs ; 
the  climate  is  moist,  but  this  is  chiefly  the  case  where  the 


666 


CLIMATE. 


country  is  the  narrowest ; on  this  account  the  quantity  of  rain 
which  falls  at  Auckland  is  much  greater  than  at  Wellington. 

It  is  generally  said  there  are  ten  degrees  difference  between 
the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres,  the  latter  being  so 
much  colder  than  the  former;  this  remark  however  is  not 
correct,  and  will  not  apply  either  to  New  Holland  or  New 
Zealand.  The  chief  difference  between  these  islands  and 
countries  in  a similar  northern  latitude,  appears  in  the  latter 
having  a greater  amount  of  summer  heat  and  winter  cold 
than  New  Zealand;  in  the  warmest  part,  the  thermometer 
seldom  rises  beyond  80°  in  summer,  or  sinks  below  40°  in 
winter.  In  the  northern  islands,  there  is  occasionally  ice 
as  thick  as  half-a-crown,  but  this  is  of  rare  occurrence;  in 
general,  though  the  nights  of  winter  are  cold,  the  days  are 
delightfully  warm  and  fine;  in  the  southern  parts  of  New 
Zealand,  the  prevailing  character  of  the  winter  is  cold  wind 
and  rain;  in  the  parts  where  the  island  attains  a greater 
width,  there  are  generally  three  frosty  nights  at  the  full  of 
the  moon;  in  the  interior,  the  winter's  cold  is  greater,  and 
the  frosts  more  frequent,  but  the  days  are  warm  and  fine ; 
there  also  in  summer  the  heat  is  greater  than  on  the  coast ; 
snow  falls  in  some  parts  of  the  Middle  Island,  but  very 
rarely  in  the  North,  except  perhaps  on  the  interior  elevated 
plains.  Once  or  twice  only  for  many  years  have  a few  flakes 
fallen  at  Wanganui. 

The  more  attentively  we  observe  the  atmospheric  changes, 
which  occur  in  different  latitudes  and  localities,  the  more 
fixed  shall  we  find  the  law  which  regulates  them ; thus,  in 
Australia,  during  the  summer  months,  it  is  noticed  that  the 
heat  gradually  increases  day  by  day,  until  it  reaches  its 
maximum,  then  a thunder  storm  takes  place,  and  the  air 
is  cooled,  or  a hot  wind  arises,  which  is  suddenly  suc- 
ceeded by  a cold  one ; so  in  New  Zealand  the  thermometer 
in  summer  rises  gradually,  until  it  reaches  its  greatest  height, 
when  a cold  wind  rushes  in  and  the  glass  falls ; the  great 
expanse  of  the  southern  polar  ocean,  the  narrow  surface 
of  the  land  compared  with  its  length,  all  together  tend 
to  reduce  the  temperature  and  hinder  the  summer  heat 


CLIMATE. 


667 


from  continuing  more  than  a few  days  at  a time,  and,  in  fact, 
breaks  up  the  summer  into  a number  of  short  periods  with, 
as  geologists  would  say,  a glacial  one  intervening.  Climates 
change  by  the  increase  or  decrease  of  forests ; artificial  causes 
arising  from  the  agency  of  man,  by  the  introduction  of 
domestic  animals,  cattle  and  sheep,  which  clear  the  ground 
of  its  natural  excessive  vegetation,  and  thus  by  exposing  the 
surface  to  the  sun’s  rays  dry  up  former  swamps,  and  diminish 
the  fall  of  rain,  often  rendering  climates  warmer  than  they 
were  before;  this  has  been  the  case  in  New  Zealand,  to  a 
great  extent;  when  I first  went  to  Wanganui,  the  ground 
having  never  been  trodden  by  animals,  was  so  light  and 
spongy  from  the  matted  roots  of  plants,  that  in  walking 
over  it,  the  foot  frequently  sank  ancle  deep,  this  caused  it  to 
retain  moisture  for  a long  time,  but  now  being  thoroughly 
trodden  and  eaten  down,  the  rain  is  either  at  once  absorbed, 
runs  off,  or  is  evaporated  by  the  sun’s  rays  ; the  scrubby 
ground  and  underwood  likewise  disappear  before  the  flocks 
and  herds ; this  also  contributes  to  change  the  climate,  in- 
dependently of  the  draining  and  breaking  up  of  the  ground, 
and  cutting  down  forests.  Climates  likewise,  in  some  respects, 
are  deteriorated  by  man  ; this  has  been  remarkably  evident 
in  our  colonies ; when  I first  knew  Australia,  hot  as  the 
climate  is,  it  was  still  remarkably  healthy  and  free  from 
disease ; before  I left,  scarlet  and  typhus  fevers  appeared, 
and  now  Sydney  is  never  free  from  the  former ; the  same 
was  the  case  with  New  Zealand,  and  the  Islands  of  the 
Pacific,  but  many  of  the  diseases  of  the  old  country  are  now 
quite  naturalized ; this  appears  in  no  small  degree  to  be 
owing  to  the  class  of  emigrants  introduced,  the  emigration 
agents  have  naturally  gone  to  the  Union  workhouses  first, 
and  although  the  parties  may  have  landed  without  any 
apparent  disease,  yet  they  have  had  the  germs  of  many 
which  strength  of  constitution  hindered  from  being  deve- 
loped, but  when  they  came  into  contact  with  the  native  he 
has  taken  them,  or  when  any  circumstances  have  impaired 
the  emigrant’s  health,  then  first  one  complaint  or  another 
has  made  their  appearance;  this  natural  healthiness  of  climate 


668 


CLIMATE. 


formerly  belonged  to  America,  Hispaniola  and  Panama,  but 
now  they  are  proverbially  sickly. 

In  New  Zealand,  disease  has  increased  with  the  population, 
so  likewise  has  it  been  with  the  vegetation,  imported  fruit 
trees,  and  plants ; the  American  blight  is  now  worse  there 
than  in  its  parent  country,  from  the  want  of  sufficient  wintry 
cold  to  keep  it  under  and  kill  it ; blight  has  not  only  been 
introduced  amongst  all  cruciferous  plants,  but  even  native 
vegetation  suffers,  it  now  attacks  the  karaka  and  ngaio  trees, 
even  the  fern  itself  does  not  escape,  these  are  collectively 
conspiring  to  change  the  climate  and  introduce  a new  order 
of  things. 


LOLIGO  VULGARIS. 


THE  NEW  ZEALAND  FERN  TREE. 


FRIENDS  TAKING  LEAVE  AT  HIKURANGI,  ON  THE  WANGANUI  RIVER. 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 


BOTANY. 

The  Botany  of  New  Zealand  is  extremely  interesting,  not 
so  much  for  the  beauty  of  its  flora,  as  on  account  of  the  fact, 
that  it  has  a peculiar  and  distinctive  character  of  its  own. 

This  was  noticed  by  the  earliest  explorers,  and  tends  to 
prove  the  truth  of  the  conjecture,  hazarded  in  treating 
of  the  zoological  features  of  the  country;  and  although  it 
is  true  eighty-nine  South  American  species  of  plants  have 
been  discovered  in  New  Zealand,  and  that  seventy-seven 
of  those  belonging  to  these  islands  are  found  in  Aus- 
tralia and  South  America,  fifty  of  which  are  common  also 
to  Europe,  and  that  sixty  plants  of  the  whole  flora  are 
European;  still,  the  fact  that  there  are  twenty-six  genera 
and  five  hundred  and  seven  species,  which  is  more  than 
two-thirds  of  the  whole,  peculiar  to  New  Zealand,  must 
establish  the  claim  of  having  a botany  especially  its  own. 


670 


BOTANY. 


Allowing  New  Zealand  to  be  the  remains  of  a grand  con- 
tinental line,  many  of  its  plants  may  be  expected  to  have  a 
wide  range,  and  be  found  in  distant  localities,  thus  those 
of  the  antarctic  islands,  which  are  equally  natives  of  New 
Zealand,  Tasmania,  and  Australia,  are  almost  invariably  found 
on  the  lofty  mountains  of  the  tropical  countries  and  islands 
adjacent  to  them. 

The  subject  of  the  distribution  of  plants  over  the  most 
widely  separated  regions  of  the  globe,  and  their  remarkable 
resemblance  in  similar  latitudes  with  those  at  different  ele- 
vations on  mountains,  is  another  subject  of  enquiry,  which 
tends  most  clearly  to  establish  the  unity  of  design  and 
operation  in  the  works  of  the  Creator.  An  instance  of  this 
is  found  in  the  Lycopodium  cernuum , (a  fern  widely  distributed 
in  all  warm  climates,)  it  only  grows  in  the  Azores,  around 
some  hot  springs  ; it  has  also  been  observed  in  St.  Paul's 
Island  (lat.  38^  S.),  there  too  by  the  side  of  similar  springs; 
these  facts  are  most  remarkable,  as  it  does  not  inhabit  Madeira, 
and  St.  Paul's  Island  is  far  beyond  its  natural  isothermal  in 
the  southern  hemisphere,  and  also  in  neither  island  is  it  ac- 
companied by  any  other  tropical  plant,  which  would  indicate 
the  aerial  transport  of  larger  objects  than  the  microscopic 
spores  of  the  Lycopodia .* 

The  way  plants  have  been  dispersed  is  another  interesting 
subject  of  enquiry,  that  minute  spores  of  fungi  are  carried 
in  the  air  to  immense  distances,  is  an  established  fact.  Pro- 
fessor Ehrenberg  found  the  spores  of  fungi  mingled  with 
atmospheric  dust  that  had  fallen  on  ships  far  out  at  sea ; 
that  seeds  are  drifted  by  currents  to  great  distances  is  well 
known,  thus  American  ones  are  cast  on  the  shores  of  Britain ; 
and  if  those  of  considerable  size  are  thus  conveyed,  it  may  be 
reasonably  supposed  others  more  minute  would  be  so  to  a far 
greater  extent;  the  molucca  beans  are  thrown  up  on  the  shores 
of  the  Orkney  Islands,  these  are  of  several  distinct  species, 
and  are  none  of  them  the  productions  of  those  islands  or 
the  neighbouring  country,  but  are  natives  of  the  western 
hemisphere. 

* See  Dr.  Hooker’s  Introductory  Essay  to  the  flora  of  New  Zealand,  pp.  22 
and  30. 


BOTANY. 


671 


On  the  N.  E.  coast  of  New  Zealand,  large  flat  beans, 
nearly  two  inches  in  diameter,  and  three  other  kinds,  are 
constantly  drifted  on  shore,  the  same  as  are  brought  from 
the  Fiji  Isles.  In  New  South  Wales  it  is  noticed  that  the 
Australian  coast  flora  is  totally  different  from  that  of  the 
interior,  and  far  more  abundant,  and  this  also  holds  good 
with  New  Zealand.  The  cedar  is  found  along  the  coasts  of 
Australia,  and  not  far  inland ; so  likewise  the  kauri  in  New 
Zealand. 

The  fact  also  of  the  earth  being  filled  with  seed  which 
retains  its  vitality  for  many  ages,  must  be  noticed ; where 
lofty  cliffs  have  fallen,  and  disclosed  former  levels,  after 
a short  time,  the  exposed  vein  of  ancient  mould  will  be 
covered  with  a vegetation  of  its  own ; so  likewise  when  a 
portion  of  forest  has  been  cleared  and  burnt  off,  the  ground, 
if  suffered  to  remain  uncultivated,  is  speedily  occupied  by  the 
Poroporo,  an  edible  solanum.  In  Australia  likewise,  where 
the  eucalyptus  forest  has  been  burnt,  it  is  succeeded  by  the 
mimosa  ; so  also  in  North  America,  the  primmval  forests  are 
said  to  be  replaced  by  the  red  cedar. 

The  disappearing  and  reappearing  of  various  plants  in  the 
same  places,  seems  to  depend  on  certain  conditions  of  soil 
and  circumstances,  yet  it  is  doubtful  whether  indigenous 
plants  ever  disappear  from  their  proper  localities ; when 
the  spot  they  inhabit  becomes  possessed  by  plants  or  trees 
of  hostile  growth  to  the  original  ones,  they  certainly  do 
appear  to  die  away  and  be  lost,  but  when  a more  favorable 
state  returns,  they  are  again  resuscitated,  as  in  the  instances 
alluded  to,  and  thus  cannot  be  said  to  be  extinct.*  This  is 
not  the  case  with  artificially  raised  flowers  ; the  horticultu- 
rist well  knows  that  every  flower  he  raises,  however  luxu- 
riantly it  may  grow  the  first  year,  will  seldom  last  more  than 

* The  same  plants  do  not  grow  on  cleared  land  that  formerly  occupied  the 
spot  when  it  was  covered  with  forest  trees  ; a distinct  class  of  vegetation  makes 
its  appearance  as  soon  as  the  fire  has  passed  over  the  ground.  The  same 
may  be  remarked  with  regard  to  the  change  that  takes  place  in  our  forests  ; a 
one  generation  falls  and  decays,  new  ones  of  a different  character  spring  up  in 
their  places. — See  Back-woods  of  Canada,  page  173. 


672 


BOTANY. 


three  seasons  in  the  same  locality  and  soon  disappears,  unless 
it  be  a travelling  plant  and  is  allowed  to  change  its  abode, 
this  fact  tends  to  prove  that  plants,  like  animals,  have  their 
proper  habitations  assigned  them,  and  with  few  exceptions, 
will  not  permanently  flourish  beyond  them ; man,  with  his 
attendants,  the  dog,  cat,  and  rat,  may  be  styled  denizens 
of  the  world ; so  some  plants  also,  such  as  the  dock,  clover, 
chickweed,  plantain,  &c.,  are  carried  wherever  he  goes,  and 
soon  so  fully  establish  themselves,  that  in  a few  years  it 
becomes  almost  impossible  to  suppose  they  have  been  intro- 
duced ; these,  however,  are  exceptions,  and  we  cannot  but 
conclude  that  New  Zealand,  embracing  the  Auckland,  Chat- 
ham, Macquarie,  and  a few  other  islands,  have  a common 
flora  as  well  as  Australia,  and  other  continents  : the  charac- 
teristic feature  of  the  New  Zealand  forest,  with  its  dark 
glossy  green  foliage,  presents  a remarkable  contrast  to  the 
glaucous  color  of  the  Australian. 

The  number  of  known  species  of  plants  was  six  hundred 
and  thirty-two,  of  which  three  hundred  and  fourteen  are 
dicotyledonous  or  endogenous,  and  the  rest  monocotyle- 
donous  and  cellular.  To  what  can  this  remarkable  dispro- 
portion be  due  ? coupled  with  the  total  absence  of  animals, 
and  the  former  existence  of  a large  number  of  wingless 
birds,  it  can  only  be  regarded  as  a proof  that  it  has  from 
most  ancient  times  been  cut  off  from  other  parts,  and  so 
retained  its  primaeval  flora. 

The  emigrant  from  the  flowery  fields  of  Britain,  cannot 
fail  being  struck  with  the  great  deficiency  of  those  enlivening 
adjuncts  to  the  landscape,  when  he  first  steps  forth  on  the 
antipodal  shores  of  New  Zealand;  the  interminable  plains  of 
sombre  fern,  will  at  first  present  an  unfavorable  contrast  to 
his  native  land,  excepting  the  palm,  dracenas,  and  fern  trees 
there  is  little  striking  in  its  landscape,  a great  want  of 
flowering  plants  is  perceived,  and  very  few  which  possess 
vivid  colors,  in  their  place  those  characteristic  trees  give  the 
distinguishing  feature  to  the  vegetation.  Britain  possesses 
only  two  scarlet  flowers  indigenous  to  its  soil  — the  poppy  and 
pimpernel — whilst  New  Zealand  has  fully  half-a-dozen,  and 
those  all  belonging  to  shrubs  or  timber  trees. 


BOTANY. 


673 


In  England  there  are  not  more  than  thirty-five  native  trees 
out  of  1400  species;  in  New  Zealand  of  flowering  trees,, 
including  shrubs  above  twenty  feet  high,  there  are  upwards 
of  113,  or  nearly  one-sixth  of  the  flora,  besides  456  shrubs 
and  plants  with  woody  stems;  the  number  of  trees,  the 
paucity  of  herbaceous  plants,  and  the  almost  total  absence 
of  annuals,  are  amongst  the  most  remarkable  features  of  the 
flora.  Dr.  Hooker  thinks  that  the  conifera  will  prove,  when 
known,  to  be  the  most  universally  prevalent  natural  family. 

The  plants  number  730,  the  ferns  (including  lycopodia) 
nearly  200,  the  mosses  and  hepaticse  450 ; and  the  same 
botanist  expresses  his  opinion  that  the  fungi  also  will  be 
found  to  number  more  than  1000  species.  The  algae 
enumerated  by  Dr.  Harvey,  are  nearly  300  species,  which 
have  from  their  beauty  and  singularity  long  been  objects  of 
great  interest.  Thus  the  total  number  of  species  according 
to  Dr.  Hooker  is  2000 ; and  the  orders  most  numerous  in 
species  are  composite,  90 ; cyperaceae,  66  : graminese,  53 ; 
scrophularineae,  40  ; orchideae,  39  ; rubiaceae,  26  ; epacrideae 
and  umbellifera,  each  23  ; none  of  which  can  be  said  to  form 
prevalent  features  in  the  landscape,  though  none  are  rare.* 

The  most  tropical  of  all  the  New  Zealand  trees  is  the  nikau 
(i areca  sapida.)  The  family  of  Palmce  has  only  this  repre- 
sentative ; it  is  a most  graceful  and  beautiful  tree,  attaining 
the  height  of  forty  feet,  and  a foot  in  diameter,  the  flower 
forms  a large  droop  of  a flesh  color,  not  much  unlike  a 
cauliflower,  which  is  succeeded  by  a bunch  of  red  berries ; 
the  pinnate  leaf  is  of  a large  size,  and  used  in  lining  the  in- 
side roof  of  houses ; the  natives  plait  it  very  neatly ; its 
tender  shoot  is  eaten  and  tastes  somewhat  like  a nut;  the 
stem  is  of  a dark  clear  green  color,  and  at  every  four  inches 
there  is  a ring,  which  marks  its  age ; it  is  only  found  in  the 
dense  forest. 

The  nearly  allied  asphodelacese,  have  more  species,  and 
give  a character  to  the  plain.  The  ti , (cor deline  Australis,  or 
dracena  Australis, J is  found  throughout  the  island  in  great 

* The  late  researches  in  the  alpine  regions  of  the  middle  island,  by  Dr. 
Haast,  have  added  greatly  to  the  numbers  here  given. 


X X 


674 


BOTANY. 


abundance,  excepting  on  the  interior  plains,  where  it  is 
seldom,  if  ever  seen ; though  so  common,  it  has  a very 
foreign  look,  and  until  it  begins  to  flower,  which  it  does  when 
about  eight  years  old,  there  are  no  branches ; afterwards  every 
year  adds  to  them,  and  the  older  it  becomes,  the  more  they 
are  increased;  it  is  eventually  a very  large  tree  of  several  feet 
in  diameter,  but  of  no  use,  as  the  trunk  is  only  a mass  of  fibres. 

The  tingahere  ( cordyline  stricta ) is  a tree  only  differing  from 
the  ti  in  having  a narrower  leaf ; it  grows  in  forests,  and  has 
a strong  fibre. 

Toi  ( dracena  indivisa).  The  fibre  of  this  tree  is  remark- 
ably strong  and  durable  ; the  leaf  is  long  and  broad,  and 
the  flower  extremely  fragrant. 

Hataheke  (phormium  tenax).  This  plant  is  well  known,  but 
not  even  now  so  much  as  it  deserves,  for  although  it  has  gained 
great  celebrity  from  the  dine  mats  made  of  it  by  the  natives, 
and  also  for  the  strength  of  its  fibre  in  the  manufacture  of 
rope,  it  will,  I am  persuaded,  soon  be  more  prized  as  a sub- 
stitute for  rags  in  making  paper,  for  which  purpose  it  is 
admirably  adapted ; the  flax,  when  immersed  in  a solution  of 
alum,  is  readily  converted  into  a pulp,  and  for  this  purpose, 
the  simple  leaves  being  cut  and  dried  in  their  raw  state,  would 
be  all  that  is  required,  and  the  material  might  thus  be  obtained 
at  a nominal  price,  since  it  grows  spontaneously  over  the 
country ; the  flower  stalk  is  called  Jaorari , the  flowers  are 
filled  with  honey,  and  in  such  quantities,  that  the  natives 
collect  it  in  calabashes ; between  the  leaves  there  is  a gela- 
tinous substance,  which,  when  dried,  is  insoluble  in  water, 
and  might,  perhaps,  be  available  as  a cement  for  china,  and 
rendering  cloth  water  proof,  the  natives  use  it  instead  of 
sealing  wax ; the  juice  of  the  root  is  also  taken  medicinally; 
there  are  many  varieties  of  this  valuable  plant. 

The  Rengarenga , marowarakihi , ( arthropodium  cirrhatum,) 
commonly  called  a lily,  is  a pretty  flowering  plant,  the  root 
formerly  was  eaten. 

Rengarenga  iti  ( arthropodium  mndidum ),  is  a diminutive 
variety  of  the  former. 

The  Kareao.  Fam.  Similaceoe  (ripogonum  parviflorum) , a 


BOTANY. 


675 


supple-jack  winch  climbs  to  the  top  of  the  highest  trees,  and 
so  mats  them  together  that  it  renders  the  forest  impassable, 
except  where  a path  has  been  cut;  the  plant  is  used  for  binding 
fences,  and  in  building  houses ; it  has  a fragrant  flower,  and 
bears  bunches  of  red  berries,  upon  which  the  pigeon  feeds. 

Fam.  Iridece . The  genus  libertia  has  three  species — grandi 
flora , ixioides,  and  micrantha.  The  Dianella  Intermedia , Tu- 
rutuj  a red  flag-leafed  plant  growing  on  grassy  plains,  and 
bearing  a white  three-leafed  flower. 

Fam.  Orchideoe.  Of  the  terrestrial  orchideoe  are — ( tkelymitra 
Forsteri , orthoceras  strictum,  microtis  Banksii , acianthus  rivu- 
laris , pterostylis  Banksii , gastrodia  sesamoides.  The  maikaika 
is  the  common  name  for  all  these ; a fine  green  and  white  one 
abounds  in  woods  and  swampy  plains ; a small  red  one  also  in 
the  marshy  spots  of  the  interior ; the  perei , a large  kind,  is 
found  in  the  woods,  it  produces  tubers  of  considerable  size, 
which  are  eaten  ; a beautiful  one,  with  a heart-shaped  leaf, 
is  also  found  in  caves  and  damp  localities,  it  bears  a fine 
crimson  or  purple  flower.  As  epiphytes  there  are  Farina 
mucronata;  the  dendrobium  Gunninghamii  is  a remarkable 
pendulous  one.  The  bolbophyllum  pygmeum  is  also  of  a 
similar  character ; they  are  fragrant  and  a great  ornament 
to  the  forest. 

Amongst  the  climbing  plants  which  cling  to  trees  for 
support,  the  most  remarkable  is  the  freycinetia  Banksii , 
a monocotyledonous  plant,  belonging  to  the  family  of  the 
pandanaceoe  ; it  chiefly  attaches  itself  to  the  kahikatea  and 
bears  a white  flower ; the  bractese  of  its  blossoms  are  thick 
and  fleshy,  and  when  ripe  very  sweet,  with  a flavor  not 
unlike  a luscious  pear ; it  flowers  in  spring  or  September, 
and  the  fruit  becomes  ripe  in  autumn,  which  is  in  March  and 
April. 

Of  the  Piperacece  there  are  two  kinds,  peperomia  urvilli- 
ance , and  the  kawakaiva  (piper  excelsumj , the  representative 
of  the  piper  methisticum , of  the  Sandwich  and  Tonga  Isles  ; 
it  is  only  used  in  New  Zealand  medicinally  by  the  natives, 
who  chew  the  root  as  a remedy  for  tooth-ache  ; the  settlers 
use  the  leaf  as  tea,  and  also  make  a very  palatable  beer  from 

x x 2 


676 


BOTANY. 


it ; the  green  fruit  much  resembles  the  Jamaica  long  pepper, 
and  when  ripe  has  a rich  luscious  flavor;  it  is  a delicate 
plant,  and  seldom  seen  in  the  forest  at  a distance  from  the 
abodes  of  men ; the  natives  state  they  brought  it  with  them ; 
if  a branch  of  the  kawakawa  were  laid  in  the  marae,  or  public 
square,  it  was  regarded  as  an  aitua,  or  omen  of  death. 

Fam.  Winter acce. — Horopito  (drimis  axillaris).  This  is 
also  a pepper  tree,  and  a much  more  pungent  one  than  the 
former ; it  abounds  in  the  interior,  but  is  not  found  in  the 
north  part  of  the  island. 

Fam.  Conifer  acce.. — Kauri  (damar  a Australis) . This  beau- 
tiful pine  is  not  found  south  of  Kawia  on  the  western  coast, 
and  the  Bay  of  Plenty  on  the  eastern ; like  the  cedar  of 
Australia,  it  is  confined  to  the  vicinity  of  the  sea ; it  loves 
low  sheltered  localities,  and  a wet  pipe-clay  soil ; the  kauri 
forest  forms  a very  deep  deposit  of  turfy  soil,  which,  being 
intermingled  with  much  resinous  matter  when  dry,  burns 
with  great  facility ; this  tree  produces  large  quantities  of 
resin,  which  is  now  eagerly  sought  after  as  an  article  of  trade, 
being  chiefly  used  in  England  for  glazing  calico  ; but  in  the 
United  States  it  forms  a substitute  for  gum  copal  in  making 
varnish,  and  for  that  purpose  is  prized  by  that  enterprising 
people ; this  resin  being  found  in  almost  all  the  coal  measures, 
indicates  great  antiquity,  its  remains  have  been  discovered  as 
far  south  as  Stewards  Island;  thus,  the  surviving  forests  of 
this  noble  pine,  are  now  confined  to  an  insignificant  region, 
but  once  had  a far  more  widely-extended  range ; the  cone 
of  this  tree  is  nearly  round,  and  when  dry  falls  to  pieces; 
some  trees  attain  a height  of  nearly  two  hundred  feet,  and 
a girth  of  forty,  with  a clear  stem,  rising  like  a tower  to 
nearly  a hundred  feet  without  a branch ; the  kauri  resin, 
when  it  first  exudes  from  the  tree,  is  of  a milky  color,  or 
transparent  like  glass,  but  with  age  acquires  a yellow  hue, 
and  that  found  on  the  sand  hills  is  scarcely  to  be  distin- 
guished in  color,  brilliancy,  and  hardness  from  amber  ; the 
largest  masses  are  dug  up  in  marshes,  frequently  lumps  are 
met  with  in  such  localities  of  a hundred  pounds  weight.* 

* The  roots  of  the  fir,  from  which  the  tar  is  chiefly  made,  are  always  most 


BOTANY. 


677 


Kauri  resin,  if  put  into  strong  rectified  spirits  of  ether  in  a 
pulverised  state,  is  immediately  taken  up ; with  the  spirit  of 
turpentine  at  270°,  a clear  yellow-tinged  solution  is  obtained ; 
it  dissolves  pretty  well  with  linseed  oil  if  boiled.  Kauri  resin 
has  been  sold  from  £80  to  £100  per  ton  ; some  of  it  is  found 
quite  soft  and  plastic,  from  its  containing  a larger  quantity  of 
turpentine  ; the  fresh  resin  is  chewed  by  the  natives  ; the  sap 
of  this  tree  is  the  thickest  on  the  shaded  side,  which  fronts 
the  south  ; it  is  there  frequently  seven  inches  through  ; the 
timber  is  very  close  grained,  and  durable  ; it  is  highly  prized 
for  spars ; the  bark  is  clear  of  climbing  plants,  which  generally 
abound  on  most  trees  of  the  forest ; its  roots  form  a kind  of 
net- work  on  the  surface  of  the  ground.  The  timber  of  the 
kauri  is  now  much  prized  in  China,  as  it  is  found  to  be  exempt 
from  the  attack  of  the  Teredo  navalis. 

Fam.  Taxacece. — Toatoa  (podocarpus  asplenifolius) . This 
tree  chiefly  grows  on  the  table-ground,  in  the  interior  of  the 
south  part  of  the  island,  where  it  is  found  in  large  clumps ; 
it  does  not  attain  any  great  size  ; the  bark  is  used  as  a brown 
dye. 

Tanekaha , tawaiwai. — ( Phyllocladus  trichomanoides) . This 
beautiful  tree  is  found  on  the  sides  of  hills ; its  general  height 
is  seldom  more  than  fifty  feet;  the  bark  is  plain,  light  colored, 
and  ringed  every  six  inches,  forming  distinct  lines  up  to  the 
branches  of  the  tree  ; the  leaves  are  parsley-shaped,  which 
chiefly  distinguishes  it  from  the  toatoa , which  are  flat  and 
oval ; the  wood  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  cypress,  it 
is  lighter  and  closer  grained  than  the  kauri , and  very  frag- 
rant ; it  is  also  more  durable  when  exposed  to  wet ; the  bark 
is  much  used  to  form  a black  and  brown  dye ; the  tree  is 
rarely  found  in  the  south,  but  in  the  north  is  very  abundant. 

Miro  (podocarpus  ferrugineaj . This  tree  bears  a rather 
large  and  flattened  fruit,  of  a bright  red  color,  and  very  aro- 
matic flavor,  which  imparts  an  agreeable  taste  to  the  pigeon 
when  it  is  in  season,  it  closely  resembles  the  yew  in  its  leaf ; 
the  wood  is  close  grained  and  durable ; it  does  not  attain 

productive  in  those  trees  which  grow  in  or  near  marshes. — See  Me  Culloch , 
page  1271,  under  the  head  of  Tar. 


678 


BOTANY. 


any  great  size  or  elevation  : but  is,  however,  a very  valuable 
timber. 

Totara  (podocarpus  totara).  This  is  a noble  tree,  and  very 
highly  prized  for  its  great  durability;  it  rises  to  the  height 
of  about  a hundred  and  fifty  feet,  the  bark  has  the  appear- 
ance of  having  been  chopped  at  intervals,  is  tough  and 
stringy,  and  much  used  as  a covering  for  houses ; like  the 
yew,  the  tree  appears  to  be  detrimental  to  underwood,  and 
seldom  is  much  found  growing  under  it ; the  totara  is  so 
abundant  as  to  form  forests  up  the  Manawatu,  and  in  some 
parts  of  the  interior,  but  in  general  is  scattered  and  in- 
termingled with  other  trees;  the  wood  of  this  noble  pine 
is  red,  hard,  and  durable,  but  brittle ; it  is  preferred  for 
canoes,  and  it  is  not  unusual  to  see  them  more  than  seventy 
feet  long,  with  a width  of  five  or  six  feet,  formed  from  a single 
log ; the  roots  generally  stand  high  out  of  the  ground,  and 
cover  a considerable  surface ; in  the  south,  this  is  by  far  the 
most  valuable  tree. 

Kahikatea , kahika,  koroi, — (Podocarpus  excelsus.J  This 
tree  is  commonly  called  the  white  pine,  from  the  color  of  its 
wood,  although  there  is  a variety  which  is  yellow,  harder, 
and  more  durable,  and  therefore  the  most  prized;  the  kahi- 
katea  may  be  considered  as  nearly  the  loftiest  tree  in  the 
New  Zealand  forest;  it  often  attains  a height  of  little  less 
than  two  hundred  feet,  and  in  that  respect  rivals  the  noble 
kauri , but  the  usual  appearance  is  not  pleasing;  it  has 
a small  top,  and  that  not  well  covered  with  leaves,  except 
when  young,  it  then  has  a finer  foliage  and  a pointed  top 
like  the  fir  tree ; swampy  grounds  are  its  favorite  localh 
ties,  and  it  is  frequently  found  growing  in  water ; in  the 
south  there  are  forests  solely  of  this  tree;  in  the  north, 
its  timber  is  much  softer  and  far  more  perishable,  yet  it 
is  of  extremely  slow  growth ; I have  known  young  trees 
which  have  not  increased  more  than  one  inch  in  height 
during  the  year;  it  bears  a little  red  oval  berry,  with  the 
seed  stuck  on  the  top ; every  other  year  the  crop  is  most 
abundant,  and  is  a fruit  highly  prized  by  the  natives,  it  is 
sweet,  but  without  flavor,  the  wood  in  general  will  not  last 


BOTANY. 


679 


more  than  twenty  years,  it  then  almost  pulverizes  with  the 
touch,  hut  if  exposed  to  the  air,  appears  to  he  as  durable 
as  either  the  rimu  or  kauri;  the  kahikatea  has  resin  in  its 
heart,  which,  when  burnt,  produces  a disagreeable  smell ; it 
contains  much  saccharine  matter,  which  is  found  in  lumps, 
of  a very  sweet  and  bitter  taste,  the  wood  likewise  has  a 
similar  quality,  a gum  also  exudes  from  it,  an  infusion  of 
the  wood  is  highly  tonic,  and  will,  I have  no  doubt,  be  found 
valuable  as  a medicine  when  better  known. 

Matai , mai,  (dacrydium  maij  a tree  with  a fine  thick  top 
and  leaf,  much  resembling  that  of  the  yew ; it  produces  a 
purple  berry  like  a small  plum,  of  a sweet,  fragrant,  though 
slimy  taste ; the  wood  is  of  a slightly  reddish  color,  close 
grained,  but  brittle,  and  peculiarly  fragrant  when  burnt ; it 
is  highly  prized  as  fuel,  and  also  much  used  for  furniture,  as 
it  works  up  very  easily,  and  comes  next  to  the  totara  in 
durability ; the  resin  from  this  tree  is  very  aromatic ; it 
chiefly  abounds  in  the  interior,  and  there  attains  a height  of 
about  a hundred  feet,  with  a diameter  of  four. 

Kawaka , hoaha,  (dacrydium  plumosum.)  This  tree  grows 
in  large  quantities  on  the  central  plains ; the  wood  is  of  a 
very  dark  red  grain,  and  said  to  be  as  durable  as  the  totara; 
it  has  a remarkable  foliage,  which  makes  it  conspicuous  in 
the  forest,  but  is  generally  found  on  the  outskirts  fronting 
the  plains  ; its  height  is  seldom  much  above  sixty  feet. 

Rimu , ( dacrydium  cujoressinum.)  This  is  one  of  the  greatest 
ornaments  of  the  New  Zealand  forest ; its  beautiful  light 
green  foliage  hangs  down  in  graceful  festoons,  the  fruit  is 
very  similar  to  that  of  the  Jcahikatea , the  wood  red,  streaked 
with  dark  lines,  and  is  much  prized  for  furniture  and  house 
building ; it  is  known  as  the  red  pine,  and  is  a hard  and 
heavy  timber,  but  rather  brittle,  it  produces  a resin,  which  is 
also  slightly  sweet  and  bitter,  and,  if  wounded,  emits  a black 
bitter  gum ; the  fragrance  of  the  wood,  when  burnt  as  fuel, 
is  extremely  pleasant ; it  attains  a great  elevation,  and  is  one 
of  the  highest  trees  of  the  forest ; young  plants  are  rarely 
met  with ; and  it  is  remarkable,  that  if  planted  in  the  open 
air,  it  requires  shelter,  as  it  cannot  stand  the  cold  of  winter, 


680 


BOTANY. 


except  it  has  the  canopy  of  a dense  forest ; and  this  remark 
applies  to  the  palm  and  several  other  forest  trees. 

In  addition  to  these  pines,  there  is  another  in  the  north 
near  Kaitaia,  called  hutu,  (phyllocladus  hutu,)  which  has  a 
fine  red-grained  timber,  most  nearly  resembling  the  Aus- 
tralian cedar ; and  on  the  sides  of  the  Tongariro  mountain, 
there  are  two  dwarf  dacrydiums , closely  allied  to  the  rimu 
and  kahikatea : they  form  low  bushes,  from  six  inches  to 
two  feet  in  height,  which  produce  much  finer  and  larger 
fruit  than  their  loftier  relatives  in  the  forest.  On  the  Ton- 
gariro and  Taranaki  mountains,  a dwarf  podocarpus , very 
similar  to  the  totara , is  also  found,  and  when  the  alpine  regions 
have  been  more  fully  investigated,  it  is  not  improbable  other 
members  of  this  family  will  be  discovered. 

The  Fam.  of  the  TJrticece — contains  the  onga-onga , furtica 
ferox,)  a shrub  about  twelve  feet  high,  having  a large  and 
rather  long  pointed  leaf  of  a dark  green,  thickly  studded  with 
formidable  yellow  spines,  which  make  those  who  touch  them 
take  care  not  to  repeat  the  experiment;  the  branches  are 
similarly  armed,  it  is  a curious  and  ornamental  shrub ; its 
wood  is  close  grained  and  hard  : in  the  north  there  is  a tree 
called  the  onga  cnga,  ( urtica  debilis,)  which  has  the  appear- 
ance of  a lime ; the  natives  affirm  that  in  its  early  years  it  is 
the  nettle  shrub. 

The  Fam.  Labiacece. — contains  micromeria  Gunning hamii, 
which  is  found  near  the  Wesleyan  settlement,  on  the  Hoki- 
anga. 

The  Fam.  Boraginaceoe. — (Anchusa  spatidata  and  myosotis 
Forsterii.) 

The  Fam.  Convolvidacece. — Powiwi , par  aha , ( calysiegia 

sepium,)  the  common  convolvolus,  it  has  a long  fleshy  root, 
which  was  formerly  eaten ; the  flower  is  white  striped  with 
pink.  The  panahi , ( calystegia  soldanclla,)  the  common  bind 
weed,  and  the  ipomoea  pendula. 

Fam.  Log anacece.  — Hang eliange,  ( geniostoma  ligustrifo- 
lium.) 

Fam.  (G-entianaceoe. — ( Gentiana  saxosa ,)  found  at  Dusky 
Bay,  and  on  the  Tongariro  ranges  j it  bears  a pale  buff- 


BOTANY. 


681 


colored  flower  and  has  a dark  chocolate  leaf.  The  gentiana 
montana  is  also  found  in  the  same  locality,  and  the  seboea 
gracilis  at  Hokianga. 

Fam.  Apocynaceoe. — ( Parsonsia  heterophylla.) 

Fam.  Oleacece. — (Olea  apetela,)  a tree  similar  to  the  iron 
wood  of  Norfolk  Island. 

Fam.  Saptoaceoe. — ( Achras  costata) . 

Fam.  Myrsinacece. — Tipau , mapu  ( myrsine  urvillice),  (myr- 
sine  divaricata) , found  at  Hokianga. 

Karaha  ( corynocarpus  Icevigata).  This  noble  tree  resembles 
the  English  laurel,  but  attains  the  size  of  a timber  tree,  the 
leaf  is  large,  glossy,  and  of  a dark  green,  the  foot  stalk 
purple,  the  flower  of  a greenish  white,  small,  and  in  clusters ; 
the  fruit  is  not  unlike  a date,  and  from  two  to  three  inches 
long;  it  has  somewhat  the  flavor  of  the  apricot,  but  too 
strong  to  be  agreeable ; it  is  called  ~kopi  and  Icon;  the 
kernel,  after  it  has  been  boiled  and  steeped  in  running  water 
for  some  days,  is  eaten,  otherwise  it  produces  madness,  and 
relaxes  the  joints,  so  that  they  will  bend  the  wrong  way;  the 
wood  when  burnt  is  peculiarly  offensive ; the  natives  state  this 
tree  was  brought  with  them.  The  karaka  is  found  throughout 
New  Zealand,  and  also  in  the  Chatham  isles. 

Of  the  extensive  American  Fam.  Epacridece , — Mingi , monoa , 
(cyatliodes  acerosa)  a shrub.  Patotara  (leucopogon  fasciculatus) , 
a diminutive  heath-like  shrub,  producing  a very  fragrant  white 
flower,  and  a small  transparent  edible  berry  of  an  orange  color ; 
it  abounds  on  sandy  plains.  Leucopogon  Fraseri, pentachondra 
pumila,  epacris  pauci  flora,  but  the  nene,  ( dracophyllum  lati- 
folium,)  is  by  far  the  most  beautiful  of  this  family,  and  attains 
the  size  of  a tree.  The  dracophyllum  longifolium  belongs  to 
the  Middle  Island,  as  also  the  dracophyllum  rosmarinifolium, 
but  the  dracophyllum  urvillianum  and  lessonianum  belong  to 
the  North  Island.  Several  members  of  this  family  are  ex- 
tremely ornamental,  and,  belonging  to  alpine  regions,  might 
be  introduced  into  England. 

Leucopogon  Lanceolatus , a shrub  growing  ten  or  twelve  feet 
high,  has  very  minute  leaves,  and  bears  bunches  of  small 
white  flowers  ; it  appears  identical  with  that  of  Australia. 


682 


BOTANY. 


Of  the  j Ericece  are  gaultheria  antipoda,  gaultheria  rupestris 
and  fluviatilis. 

Fam.  Campanulacece. — Rimuroa  (wahlenhergia  gracilis)  the 
blue-bell  of  New  Zealand. 

Fam.  Lobeliacece. — Oru,  (lobelia physa hides, — lobelia  alata, 
■ — angulata, — littoralis, — submera.)  The  kowitiwiti  and  puan- 
reroa  belong  to  this  family. 

Fam.  Styllidece. — Stylidium  spatJialatum  and  Forstera  sedi - 

Fam.  Goodeniacece. — ( Goodnenia  repens). 

Of  Gompositce  are  the  following  tribes  and  genera  : — 

Cichoracece,  parerarera  (scorzonera  scapigera)  ; this  grows 
on  the  central  plains  in  large  quantities.  Toitaho , kueo,  ( pieris 
hieracioides,  attenuata , sonchus  oleraceus).  Puwha,  (vernoni- 
acece  Shawia). 

Fam.  Asteroideoe. — Pekapeka  (solidago  arbor escens) . Papa- 
taniwaniwa,  (LagenopJiora-Forsteri)  the  native  daisy,  (Lage- 
nophora  lanata,  aster  holocericeus , aster  coriaceus).  Ake  piro, 
(Hoxtonia  farfuracea),  a pretty  shrub  with  daisy-like  flowers. 
(Vittadenia  Australis.)  Peke  peke,  (celmisia  holocericeus,)  a 
large  broad-ribbed  leafed  aster,  dark  green  on  one  side,  and 
white  downy  on  the  other,  growing  on  the  central  plains. 
Parerarera,  peka  peka,  (celmesia  coriacea),  a smaller  kind, 
found  in  the  same  parts  as  the  former. 

Fam.  Senecionidacece. — Kohiriki  (JBidens  pilosa)  cowitch 
(cotula  coronopifolia,  myriogyne  minuta,  solivatenella,craspedia 
uniflora,  cassmia  leptophylla,  ozothamnus  pinifolia,  helichry- 
sum  bellid.ioides,  (Pukatea)  gnaphalium  luteoalbum, — simplex, 
— lanatum,  — involucratnm,  — keriense,  — trinervoe,  arnica 
operina,  senecio  lautus, — Australis, — neglectus, — argutus, — • 
quadridentatus, — hispidulus. 

Of  Rubiacece  or  Cinchonacece. — Are  the  genera  ( opercularia , 
diphylla,  aspera) — karamu  (coprosma  lucida). 

FLupiro  (coprosma fcetidissima) , a small-leafed  shrub,  growing 
in  the  woods  on  the  central  plains,  emitting  a very  foetid  smell, 
perceptible  in  passing  it,  and  especially  when  the  leaves  are 
rubbed. 

(Coprosma  propinqua, — rotundifolio — rhamnoides, — gracilis 


BOTANY. 


683 


— divaricata, — acerosa, — repens , — spathulata,  Ronabea  Aus- 
tralis, nertera  depressa,  geophyla  dichondrcefolia.) 

Fam.  Loranthacece,  or  Viscum.  Mistletoe  is  found  on  several 
trees,  it  is  parasitical  on  the  kahikatoa,  the  puriri,  the  tawai, 
the  tataka,  and  several  others.  The  Puka,  ( viscum  antarcti - 
cum,)  is  found  on  the  kahikatea  and  the  pukatea;  it  hears  a 
blue  berry.  Tirauriki,  [viscum pubigerium.)  Pirita  (viscum 
salicornioides,)  it  grows  on  the  ngaio , tataka,  and  manuka  trees, 
and  bears  a transparent  edible  berry ; the  most  beautiful  of 
all  is  the  r over  ore,  (loranthus  tetrapetalus,)  which  bears  a very 
fine  bright  scarlet  flower ; it  is  found  on  the  tawai,  (Betula 
nigra,)  the  black  birch  or  beech  tree. 

Fam.  Conece. — Gen.  alseuosmia. 

The  Umbelliferoc  contain  Hydrocotyle  elongata, — microphylla, 
— Novae  Zealandioe , — dichondrcefolia, — luteromeria,  compacta, — 
moschata, — Asiatica, — Petroselinum  prostratum,— filiformi.  Ta- 
ramea,  papaki,  kueo,  (Ligusticum  aciphylla,)  a prickly  palmated 
leafed  plant,  abounding  in  the  central  plains,  having  an  edible 
tap  root,  somewhat  like  a carrot;  the  common  name  is  the 
Spaniard.  The  ergngium  vesicidosum  is  a low  prickly  plant, 
very  similar  in  appearance  to  a diminutive  thistle.  I have 
met  with  it  at  the  Wanganui  Heads,  and  on  the  coast  near 
Taranaki. 

Ligusticum  gingidium , Peucedanum  geniculatum,  Apium 
graveolens.  There  are  several  varieties  of  umbelliferous  plants 
growing  on  the  central  plains,  which  might  be  cultivated 
as  vegetables,  especially  a white  carrot,  pinaihere.  A variety 
of  the  taramea  is  found  on  the  Ruahine  and  the  Kaikoura 
mountains,  which  produces  a resinous  balsamic  substance, 
highly  aromatic.  The  taniwaniwa,  or  aniseed,  also  grows 
abundantly  on  the  grassy  plains. 

Of  the  Araliacece, — so  general  in  South  America,  several 
representatives  are  found  in  New  Zealand. 

Panax  simplex.  Waupaku,  wauwaupaku  (panax  arboreum 
cussonia  Lessonii,  Polyscias  pinnata,)  Pate,  [Aralia  Schlefflera ,) 
Horoeka,  hohoeka  [aralia,  crassifolia) . A tree  with  singular 
long  narrow  leaves,  nearly  two  feet  long,  and  not  above 
an  inch  wide  ; in  its  early  state,  they  are  serrated,  but  as  it 


684 


BOTANY. 


grows  older  they  become  smooth  and  considerably  shorter; 
it  is  a very  ornamental  tree ; the  wood  is  close  grained,  heavy 
and  hard. 

Of  the  Oxalidece . — Tutaikaka  (Oxalis  Urvillei  cataract  ce ). 
A white  sorrel  found  near  Kerikeri  Water-fall,  and  thence 
deriving  its  name ; in  several  parts  it  is  larger  in  size, 
( Propinqua , — exilis , — diver  gens,  — tenuicaulis , lacicola , — cilii- 
fera , — crassifolia) . The  oxalis  which  flourishes  on  sand  hills, 
produces  the  largest  yellow  flower,  and  that  on  the  cold 
grassy  plains  the  least. 

Gferanicaeece. — Huika  ( Geranium  pilosum — retorsum , pe- 
largonium clandestinum) . — Kapntawiti,  kurahura , porewarewa. 

Hypericaceoe. — ( Hypericum  pusillum ) . 

Fam.  Meliacece. — Kohekohe. — [Hartighsea  spedabilis) . This 
tree  attains  a considerable  size;  the  leaves  are  extremely 
bitter  and  the  infusion  is  taken  as  a tonic ; a weak  decoction 
is  also  used  by  females  who  have  lost  their  infants,  to  stop 
the  secretion  of  milk ; its  flowers  come  out  from  the  stem, 
and  are  fragrant ; the  sap-wood  is  perfectly  white,  but  the 
heart  of  a dark  red,  and  very  similar  in  grain  and  color  to 
mahogany ; it  attains  a height  of  about  sixty  feet. 

Fam.  Sapindacece. — Topitopi , titoki , iitongi  ( aledryon  excel- 
sum) . A very  ornamental  tree,  with  a glossy  light  green  leaf ; 
the  fruit  is  also  very  beautiful,  it  bursts  from  its  sheath  like  a 
bright  red  strawberry,  with  a shining  black  seed  in  the  centre; 
the  fruit  is  tart,  though  edible,  and  from  the  seed  a fine  oil  is 
expressed ; in  the  south,  the  fruit  is  called  titoki , and  the 
tree  topitopi ; it  is  considered  a durable  timber,  and  well 
adapted  for  ship-building.  Ake , ake  rautangi , ( Dodoncea  spa- 
tulata) . This  tree  does  not  attain  any  size,  but  the  wood  is 
considered  the  hardest  and  toughest  in  New  Zealand ; it  was 
used  for  weapons  of  war. 

Fam.  Bombacece. — Holier e [Hoheria  populnea).  A tree  with  a 
fine  net-like  fibre  under  the  outer  bark ; both  the  leaves,  bark, 
and  flowers,  which  are  white,  have  a glutinous  taste,  like  the 
mallow ; it  does  not  attain  any  size,  is  ornamental,  but  only 
medicinally  useful ; the  leaves  of  the  young  shrub  are  different 
from  those  of  the  grown-up  tree ; aute  (ancient  cloth)  was 


BOTANY. 


685 


formerly  made  from  the  inner  bark  of  this  tree ; it  is  still  worn 
as  ribbons. 

Fam.  Tiliacece. — Wau  ( entelea  arborescens) . The  wood  of  this 
tree  is  remarkably  light,  and  is  used  by  the  natives  instead  of 
cork  to  float  their  nets. 

Fam.  Eleocarpaceoe. — Hinau  (. Eleocarpus  hinau).  A fine 
tree,  with  a bright  green  spiral  leaf ; the  bark  is  rough  and 
unsightly ; it  attains  a considerable  size  and  height ; the  wood 
is  of  a beautiful  yellow  color ; the  berries  are  made  into  bread ; 
the  bark  is  extremely  astringent,  is  used  as  a brown  dye, 
and  by  immersing  the  articles  thus  colored  in  a ferruginous 
swamp,  they  are  turned  into  a bright  and  durable  black. 

Mako , mahomako  ( Friesia  rcicemosa).  This  is  a beautiful 
tree,  bearing  bunches  of  fragrant  bell  flowers,  and  currant- 
shaped  berries,  which  are  eaten ; it  closely  resembles  the 
vibes  ; the  leaves  are  reddish  and  transparent. 

Fam.  j Sturculiacece. — (. Plagianthus ) . 

Fam.  Malvacece. — ( Hibiscus  vesicarius).  A fine  plant  of  this 
family,  bearing  a large  pink  flower,  is  found  at  the  North 
Cape,  it  attains  a height  of  nearly  a yard ; another  closely 
resembles  one  seen  in  our  gardens ; the  flower  is  of  a light 
primrose  color,  with  a very  dark  centre. 

Fam.  Linece. — Ririwa  ( linum  monogynum).  It  grows  about 
two  feet  high,  and  bears  a fine  white  flower,  sometimes  edged 
with  blue,  and  occasionally  entirely  blue. 

Fam.  Garyophyllece  vel  Alsinacece. — (Aren aria  media , stel- 
laria  media), 

Fam.  Elcdincaeoe. — (Elatine  grutioloides). 

Fam.  Pittosporaceoe. — Tarata  (Pittosporum  crassifolium) . — 
An  ornamental  tree,  producing  turpentine ; the  leaves  are 
fragrant. 

Tataka  (P — undulatum  vel  umbellatum) . It  is  also  a 
resinous  tree. 

Tawiri , kohukohu  (P — tenuifolium , P — eugenioides , P — 
cornifolium , P — reflexum,  P — - penielioides , P — radicans.) . 

Karo  pittosporum , an  elegant  tree,  with  dark,  glossy,  oval 
leaves,  and  small  purple  blossoms. 

Fam.  Droseraceoe. — Wahu  (Drocera  propingua).  A pretty 


686 


BOTANY. 


little  fly-trap,  shield-shaped  leaf,  pink  flower,  red  bulb  root, 
sheathed  in  a black  skin.  ( Drocera  intermedia) . A larger 
kind,  growing  in  wet  ground,  with  a branch-shaped  leaf,  and 
white  flower. 

Fam.  Violaracece. — Haka  (. Erpetion  spathulata) . A small 
white  violet,  another  with  purple  stripes,  and  a purple  one, 
all  scentless. 

Fam.  Flacourtiaceoe. — Mahoe  (melicytus  ramiflorus).  It 
grows  to  the  height  of  about  fifty  feet ; the  wood  is  heavier 
than  the  rimu , it  has  a fine  thin  spiral  leaf.  ( Melicytus  macro - 
phyllus.) 

Fam.  Gruciferce. — Panapana  (nasturtium,  sylvestre.  A small 
leafed  cress,  with  a white  flower,  growing  in  the  woods. 

( Cardamine  debilis , Alyssum  maritimum , Lepidium  oleraceum. 

The  hanea  is  a larger  cress,  with  a brownish  hairy  leaf, 
and  small  yellow  flowers ; it  grows  near  rivers,  and  attains  a 
height  of  about  eighteen  inches. 

The  naunau  has  a thick  dark  glossy  leaf,  of  an  oval  form, 
and  bears  a very  small  white  flower,  in  size  and  appearance 
resembling  a wall-flower.  The  tawera  is  a water-cress. 

Fam.  Ranunculus. — (- ranunculus  rivularis , — acaulis , acris , 
— plebeius, — hirtus} ) Kaikaiarure.  The  common  butter-cup 
is  remarkable  for  the  great  irregularity  in  its  petals ; it  may 
be  found  with  either  one,  two,  three,  or  more,  up  to  nine ; 
the  kopata  uraura,  is  a very  large  and  beautiful  butter-cup, 
with  glossy  leaves,  found  in  pools  of  water  on  elevated  parts 
of  the  interior ; it  is  said  to  be  extremely  poisonous ; the 
roots  are  thick  and  long,  like  tubers. 

The  kowai  kura , a large  kind,  with  downy  leaves ; the  flower 
small  in  proportion  to  the  plant ; there  is  also  a pretty  kind 
growing  in  swampy  ground. 

Fam.  Clematis. — ■ Piki  arero,  pua  wananga , a clematis  bear- 
ing a large  white  scentless  flower. 

Puatautaua , a small  greenish  white  flowering  clematis,  very 
fragrant ; it  is  chiefly  found  on  the  sand  hills  near  the  sea. 

Fam . Grisielinece. — ( Griselinea) . 

Fam.  Saxifragece  vel  cunoniaceoe. — ( Quintina  serrata , wein- 
mannia  betulina , — fuchsioides, — sylvicola ) . 


BOTANY. 


687 


Towai,  tawera,  {Leiospernum  racemosum)  a large  tree  ; the 
wood  red  and  streaked  with  black ; it  is  valuable  for  furniture. 
Makamaka  {ackarna  roscefolia) . 

Fam.  Crassulaceoe. — (Tillaea) . 

Fam.  Ficodece. — Fruerueka  ( mesembryanthemum  Australe)  • 
There  are  two  kinds,  one  bearing  a pink  the  other  a white 
flower.  Rengarenga , {Tetragona  expansa) . The  panamata, 
paraihia,  a diminutive  kind  of  spinach,  with  a very  dark  leaf. 

Fam.  Cucurbit acece. — Mawai , {sicyos  Australis) . A creeping 
plant,  resembling  the  cucumber. 

Fam.  P as siflor acece. — Kohia,  powiwi  { passijiora  tetranda). 
It  bears  a small  green  and  orange  flower,  rather  fragrant, 
and  a fruit  of  a bright  orange  color  ; an  oil  is  expressed  from 
the  seeds. 

Fam.  Haloragece. — Toatoa  { cercodia  erecta),  a stiff  growing 
weed,  about  a foot  and  a half  high,  with  a four-sided  stem, 
and  strong  serrated  leaf ; it  is  used  medicinally  by  the  natives. 

Cercodia  alternifolia. — nicana , goniocarpus  depressus,~te- 
tragynus.  Piri  piri, — citriodorus , myriophyllum  propinquam. 

Fam.  Onagracece.  Kohutuhutu , kotukutuku , kohutukutuku 
{fuchsia  excorticata) , a large  tree,  frequently  near  three  feet 
in  diameter ; it  takes  its  name  from  shedding  its  bark ; this 
is  the  only  deciduous  tree  in  the  New  Zealand  forest,  the 
flowers  appear  before  the  leaves,  and  generally  from  the 
branches ; they  are  at  first  of  a greenish  blue  with  a purple 
inside,  but  afterwards  change  to  a bright  carmine ; the  fruit 
is  edible.  Totera  {Fuchsia  procumbens.) 

Epilobium  nummularifolium , — peduncular e9  {kokota) — mi- 
crophyllum , — rotundi/oliiim , — thy  mi  folium, — alsinoides , — nerte- 
rioides , — atriplicifolium , — pubens,  — cinereum , — incanum 
hirtigerum, — virgatum , — glabellum , — confertum , — pallidiflorum , 
junce  um , — hcdoragifolium . 

My rt acece. — This  family,  although  less  numerous  in  genera, 
yet  possesses  some  of  a very  general  distribution,  and  others 
which  form  some  of  the  most  beautiful  and  useful  trees. 

Kahikatoa , manuka,  Leptospernum  scopiarum.)  This  is  a 
beautiful  tree,  the  leaf  is  small,  but  aromatic,  the  flowers 
white,  and  very  abundant ; it  produces  both  flowers  and  fruit 


688 


BOTANY. 


when  only  a few  inches  high,  and  yet  attains  the  size  of  a 
large  timber-tree,  when  it  ceases  to  flower  and  seed  so 
freely.-—  (L — ericoides . ) 

Aka,  ( metrosideros  buxifolia,)  a climbing  plant,  bearing  a 
beautiful  red  flower ; the  stem  is  very  strong  and  durable  ; 
is  used  for  tying  up  fences,  and  timbers  of  houses ; it  has  a 
myrtle-shaped  leaf,  a variety  of  this  bears  a white  flower.  ( — - 
perforata). — Rata  ( — robusta).  This  also  bears  a bright 
red  flower,  and  in  such  quantities  as  to  give  the  tree  the 
appearance  of  being  a red  one  at  a distance,  the  rata  is 
at  first  a climber,  it  throws  out  feelers  or  tentacles,  by  which 
it  holds  on  to  the  tree  it  clings  to  ; eventually  it  becomes  a 
very  large  timber-tree,  and  kills  the  kind  friend  of  its  early 
days ; it  is  often  seen  clasping  the  dead  trunk  of  its  former 
supporter  after  it  has  rotted  away,  and  become  separated 
from  the  ground,  which  gives  it  a very  singular  appearance ; 
the  rata  becomes  a noble  tree ; its  aerial  roots  then  disappear 
and  it  overtops  most  of' the  trees  of  the  forest;  its  head 
is  very  thick,  and  leaf  like  the  myrtle,  but  not  so  pointed,  the 
timber  very  hard,  tough,  and  of  a dark  red,  and  is  valuable 
in  ship-building  and  for  carts. 

Pohutukaua  (M — tomentosa).  This  is  a very  ornamental 
tree ; it  only  grows  in  the  north  end  of  the  island,  amongst 
the  rocky  cliffs  on  the  sea  shore  ; its  leaves  are  large,  thick, 
of  a greenish  blue  externally,  and  white  underneath ; it  is  not 
found  inland,  except  on  the  little  islands  in  the  central  lakes ; 
the  trunk  is  gnarled,  and  twisted  in  every  direction,  the 
wood  is  extremely  hard,  and  of  a dark  red,  chiefly  used  for 
ships  and  knees  of  boats ; it  is  fine  fuel,  and  so  generally 
used  for  this  purpose,  that  soon  this  chief  ornament  of  the 
northern  shores  of  New  Zealand  will  scarcely  be  met  with, 
it  is  not  found  further  south  than  a few  miles  beyond  the 
Mokau. 

Rakapika  ( M — * florida.  M — diffusa,  M — lucida,  M — 
hypericifolia,  M—  salicifolia) , Mairetaivaka,  maire,  ( Eugenia 
mairej . A fine  large  tree;  the  timber  is  close  grained  and 
heavy  ; it  is  considered  very  valuable  for  machinery,  and  can 
be  used  the  same  as  box-wood. 


BOTANY. 


689 


Rama-rama,rohutu}  (myrtus  bullata).  The  myrtle  ; it  has 
a fragrant  leaf,  and  a pretty  white  flower ; it  attains  the 
size  of  a small  tree,  about  thirty  feet  high,  and  is  said  to  be 
common  to  the  Chilian  forests. 

Fain.  Rosacea? . Pirikahu,  kaikaiaruri,  hutiwai,  (acoena 
sanguisorbce) . A low  creeping  bnr,  which  sticks  to  the 
garments,  as  the  name  implies.  It  is  called  Hine-nui-te-po’s 
hair. 

The  tutai  whioi}  a fine  scarlet  flowering  bur,  found  on  the 
central  plains. 

Tataramoa,  (Rabrus  Australis).  The  New  Zealand  bramble 
or  raspberry ; it  produces  an  orange-colored  fruit,  of  good 
flavor,  and  in  great  abundance,  upon  which  the  pigeon  feeds, 
this  plant  climbs  up  to  the  tops  of  the  highest  trees,  and 
frequently  has  a stem  six  inches  in  diameter;  it  looks  like  an 
immense  rope  suspended  from  the  highest  branches,  and  is 
coiled  in  large  folds  on  the  ground ; the  wood  is  used  for  any 
purpose  which  requires  flexibility.  ( Rubrus  Schmidelioides — 
cissioides),  the  last  is  a remarkable  bush;  the  leaves  are 
extremely  small,  placed  at  the  ends  of  a long  cruciform-shaped 
stalk,  covered  with  small  bright  yellow  spines.  I have  never 
noticed  either  flower  or  fruit ; the  bush  appears  at  first  sight 
to  be  destitute  of  leaves. 

Fam.  Leguminosce. — Kowai,  Edwardsia  microphylla.)  This 
tree  attains  a very  great  size  in  the  interior  ; on  the  Ruahine 
range  it  is  found  as  large  and  lofty  as  any  of  the  trees  in  the 
forest ; it  bears  a bright  yellow  papilionaceous  flower  thick 
and  short  in  early  spring,  which  gracefully  hangs  pendant 
from  the  slender  branches,  ( — grandiflora,  clianthus  puniceus.) 
Koivaingutukaka,t he  parrotVbill  acacia,  from  the  resemblance 
its  bright  red  flowers  bear  to  it ; this  much  admired  shrub 
is  only  met  with  in  the  vicinity  of  old  pas,  and  it  is  not  impro- 
bable that  it  has  been  introduced.  I received  an  account  of 
a French  vessel,  which  was  captured  many  years  ago  in  the 
Bay  of  Islands ; the  natives  emptied  many  of  the  boxes  on  a 
small  island  in  the  Kerikeri  River,  which  to  their  disappoint- 
ment were  found  to  be  only  filled  with  seeds ; it  was  remarked 
a few  years  afterwards  the  whole  island  was  covered  with  this 

Y Y 


690 


BOTANY. 


shrub ; its  beauty  attracted  attention ; the  flowers  were  stuck 
in  the  ear  as  an  ornament,  the  seed  was  sought  after  and 
carried  to  every  part ; there  appears  some  probability  in  this 
having  been  the  case,  it  differs  so  widely  from  other  New 
Zealand  plants. 

(Guilandina  bonducj  maukoro,  ( carmichaelia  Australis , 
griselinia  lucid, a,)  makaka  maukoro , a broom,  bearing  a very 
pretty  white  flower  streaked  with  purple,  only  found  in  the 
interior.  Taunoka , the  common  broom ; there  is  a saying, 
that  it  has  no  heart,  and  a bad  man  is  compared  to  it ; there 
are  several  varieties  of  it,  but,  with  one  exception,  their 
flowers  are  insignificant. 

Fam.  Rhamnece.—Piripiri  wata , ( carpodetus  serratus,)  it 
bears  a small  white  flower,  and  is  found  near  Lake  Omapere. 

Pennantia  corymbosa.  Kumarahou , (; pomaderris  kumarahou,) 
a pretty  shrub,  bearing  tufts  of  buff-colored  flowers,  only 
found  in  the  north  end  of  the  island.  Tauhinu,  ( — ericifolia,) 
a shrub  also  peculiar  to  the  north,  bearing  an  insignificant 
white  flower.  To  this  family  also  belong  Corokia  and  Ixerba. 

Fam.  Goriariacece. — Tujoakihi , tutu , Pukou,  (coriaria  sar- 
mentosa ,)  peculiar  to  New  Zealand,  and  formerly  abounded 
in  every  part  of  the  islands,  but  is  now  as  rapidly  disap- 
pearing, as  cattle  and  sheep  increase;  it  produces  a large 
droop  of  a currant-like  fruit,  of  a deep  purple  color,  with 
seeds  outside  ; the  natives  express  the  juice  in  large  quan- 
tities, which  they  drink  with  impunity,  having  first  carefully 
strained  off  all  the  seeds  and  foot-stalks,  which  are  highly 
poisonous ; they  also  boil  it  with  sea-weed,  and  eat  it  in  the 
form  of  jelly ; sheep  and  cattle  are  extremely  fond  of  its 
leaves;  the  young  shoots  come  up  remarkably  strong,  tender, 
and  succulent ; if  fed  upon  the  first  thing  in  the  morning 
with  an  empty  stomach,  it  frequently  occasions  death,  but, 
otherwise,  taken  with  grass,  it  appears  to  be  as  nourishing 
a food  as  clover,  which  also  produces  similar  effects ; it  is 
remarked,  that  this  plant  makes  much  rich  vegetable  soil ; 
at  any  rate,  it  is  never  found  flourishing  on  bad  land ; it 
attains  a height  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet ; there  is  a 
another  kind,  with  a smaller  leaf,  much  longer,  narrower, 


BOTANY. 


691 


and  more  pointed  in  proportion,  with  a larger  fruit,  less 
highly  colored,  but  the  natives  do  not  eat  it,  considering  it 
more  dangerous  than  the  former ; there  is  also  a very  dimin- 
utive kind,  with  a flower  not  unlike  that  of  mignionette, 
which  it  little  exceeds  in  size ; this  is  only  found  in  the  interior : 
its  fruit  is  not  eaten. 

Fam.  Rutacece. — Warangi,  rangiora , ( melicope  ternata,)  a 
small  tree,  with  a large  dark-green  leaf,  having  a downy  white 
underside ; it  bears  a bunch  of  small  flowers,  which  have  the 
fragrance  of  the  violet. 

The  Pukerangiora  is  a larger  variety  of  the  same  ; the  leaf 
is  nearly  a foot  long  by  almost  the  same  breadth  : it  pro- 
duces resin  ; this  is  a singular  and  very  ornamental  shrub, 
growing  about  twenty  feet  high,  ( melicope  simplex.) 

Fam.  j Euphorbiacece. — Tauwau,  ueueeke,  (euphorbia  glauca,) 
it  chiefly  grows  near  the  sea-shore,  and  in  open  spots  at 
the  mouth  of  rivers.  (Plagianthus , devaricatus — betulinus , 
— urticinus.)  Nau  nau , Mated  mai.  Wai  u atua. 

Fam.  Santalacece. — ( Maire,  maire  tawaki , maire  taiki,  (mida 
salicifolia.)  The  representative  of  the  sandal-wood  family. 
( — eucalyptoides , — myrtifolia) . 

Fam.  Thymelacece. — Kaikaiatua , (pimelia  virgata ,)  a low 
shrub,  bearing  a small  white  flower,  and  having  four  leaves 
at  right  angles  down  the  stem  : it  closely  resembles  the  daphne 
outatoranga,  ( — arenaria,  — Pilosa , — prostrata , — gnidia,  — 
urv  Uliana.) 

Fam.  Proteacece. — Torn,  (persoonia  torn,)  a tree  found  in 
the  Bay  of  Islands.  Rewa , rewarwae , ( knightia  excelsa,) 
this  beautiful  tree  closely  resembles  the  banksia  of  Australia : 
when  young  it  is  very  ornamental,  and  grows  in  a tapering 
form:  it  has  a curious  dark  red  honey- suckle  flower;  the 
wood  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  casuarina , and  is  durable ; 
it  is  used  chiefly  for  pales,  shingles,  and  rails ; attains  a con- 
siderable size  and  height. 

Fam.  Laurinece. — Tarairi , ( laurus  tarairi,)  a fine  large- 
leafed  tree,  which  attains  a considerable  size,  but  is  only 
found  north  of  the  Waikato;  it  bears  a long  oval  kernel, 
thinly  covered  with  pulp,  which  has  a strong  taste  of  turpen- 

Y Y 2 


692 


BOTANY, 


tine ; the  fruit  has  a fine  purple  bloom,  and  looks  like  a large 
plum ; the  wood  is  only  used  as  fuel. 

Tawa  ( Laurus  Tawa),  a noble  looking  tree,  forming  forests 
in  several  parts  of  the  south,  an  exception  to  the  general 
character  of  the  New  Zealand  forest,  which  is  composed  of  all 
kinds  of  trees  intermingled.  The  tawa  has  a small  narrow 
leaf,  and  bears  a purple  plum-shaped  fruit,  not  bad  eating ; 
the  kernel  when  cooked  is  also  eaten  ; the  tree  attains  a great 
size,  but  the  wood  is  only  used  as  fuel,  as  it  soon  takes  the 
worm  : it  is  very  white  and  light;  the  inner  bark  is  sweet, 
and  infused,  makes  a very  nice  beverage  for  the  traveller 
when  his  tea  is  finished,  as  it  does  not  require  sugar.  Tangeo, 
(L — calicaris.) 

Fam.  Atherospermacece. — Pukatea , ( laurelia  Novce  Zeal :)  a 
large  timber  tree,  but  very  perishable,  it  decays  in  a single 
year;  its  roots  are  remarkably  prominent,  like  the  Austra- 
lian fig  tree ; the  wood  is  spongy,  but  tough ; it  is  more 
durable  in  water. 

Fam.  Polygonaceos. — Puk a, polygonum  Australe , the  willow 
plant. 

Heruna,  ( — adpressum ,)  pohuehue , ( — complexum,)  tutuna- 
hua , ( — prostratum , rumex  crispus, — brunonianus.) 

Fam.  Chenopodiacece. — Poipapa , ( chenopodium  triandrum , 
— botrys , — glaucum , — maritimum,  — fruticosum , salicornia 
indica.) 

Fam.  AmaranthacecE. — Peronychicce. — Nahui,  ( alternan - 
theta  denticulata,)  kohukohu , {miniarum  biflorum. 

Fam.  Plantaginece. — Kopakopa , (plantago  major.)  This 
plantain  closely  resembles  the  European,  but  is  indigenous 
and  a valuable  medicinal  herb,  well  known  to  the  natives. 
Plantago  varia , a narrow  downy  plant,  leaf  long  and  of  a 
brownish  color. 

Fam.  Salviaceoe. — Salvia  koru.  This  beautiful  plant  is  only 
found  in  the  vicinity  of  the  North  Cape,  it  bears  a large  blue 
and  white  flower. 

Fam.  Primulacew. — (. Anagallis  arvensis,  samolus  littoralis.) 

The  Fam.  Fagus. — Tawai  betula  nigra , has  perhaps  two 
representatives,  which  attain  a great  height  and  diameter; 


BOTANY. 


693 


they  form  alpine  forests  in  the  southern  extremity  of  the 
North  Island,  and  everywhere  abound  in  the  Middle  Island; 
the  rat  formerly  fed  on  the  mast : it  is  said  only  to  fruit  once 
©very  ten  years. 

Fam.  Scrophularinaceoe. — Koromiko , kokomiko,  (veronica 
salicifolia,)  perhaps  the  most  generally  diffused  plant  in  New 
Zealand,  and  a very  ornamental  one,  but  disappearing  before 
the  horse;  formerly  large  groves  might  be  seen  of  it  in  every 
direction  : it  bears  a tapering  shaped  flower,  of  a purplish 
white.  Napuka,  kcrokio,  (V — speciosaf)  a variety  found  at  the 
Hokianga  Heads,  bearing  a fine  scarlet  flower ; the  leaves  are 
broader,  rounder,  and  thicker  than  the  former.  Taranga , 
( — angusti folia,)  a small-leafed  variety.  ( — macro  carp  a, — • 
lig  us  trifolia, — parvijlora , — elliptica , — cataractoef)  Pirili , ( — di - 
osmifolia, — calycina,  gratiola  sexdentata , euphrasia  cuneata,) 
the  sides  of  Tongariro  are  covered  with  several  curious  varie- 
ties of  this  family,  some  of  which  may  prove  to  be  new. 

Fam.  Cyrtandraceoe. — Waiuatua,  (rhabdothamnus  solandri.) 
A beautiful  delicate  shrub,  with  small  round  leaves,  and  bell- 
shaped flowers  of  an  orange  color,  streaked  with  purple,  much 
resembling  the  penstemon. 

Fam.  Solaneoe. — Poroporo ,koho]io,koheuheu , (solanum  lacina- 
tumf)  a bush  sometimes  found  large  enough  to  be  classed 
amongst  trees  ; it  occasionally  bears  white  flowers  and 
lighter  green  leaves,  but  in  general  the  flowers  are  very 
similar  in  color  to  those  of  the  potatoe,  and  the  leaves  of  a 
dark  sombre  hue ; the  berries  are  as  large  as  gooseberries,  of 
an  orange  color,  and  are  commonly  eaten  ; there  is  a smaller 
kind  closely  resembling  the  English  night-shade  in  size  and 
flower,  which  is  white ; it  bears  a purple  berry,  which,  with 
the  leaves,  are  both  eaten ; its  native  names  are  raupeti  and 
remuroa. 

Fam.  Myoperineoe. — Manama,  ( arioennia  tomentosa ,)  the 
mangrove ; it  abounds  in  the  north  end  of  the  island,  where 
forms  a kind  of  marine  grove,  having  numbers  of  oysters 
sticking  to  its  roots  and  branches,  but  it  is  not  found  south 
of  Kawia.  Ngaio , (- my'oporum  Icetum,)  a glossy-leafed-tree, 
abounding  near  the  sea  ; in  the  south  it  attains  a considerable 


691 


BOTANY. 


size ; the  wood  is  hard  and  durable  ; when  young  it  is  very 
ornamental,  and  valuable  as  a shelter  from  the  sea  air,  which 
seems  to  suit  it  the  best ; it  is  often  three  feet  in  diameter. 
( — pubescens,)  a variety  belonging  to  the  Middle  Island. 

Fam.  Vtrbenacte — Puriri  (vitex  littoralis).  This  tree  is 
not  found  south  of  Kawia : it  belongs  to  the  same  order  as 
the  teak,  and  seems  to  require  the  sea  air,  the  leaf  is  glossy ; 
the  flower  much  like  the  anterhinum ; the  wood  is  of  a dark 
olive  brown  color,  very  close  grained  and  heavy ; it  is  ex- 
tremely durable,  and  can  only  be  worked  when  green;  posts 
nearly  forty  years  in  the  ground  have  been  found  as  fresh  as 
when  first  put  in;  this  valuable  timber  is  generally  much 
pierced  by  the  grub  of  a large  cerambix. 

Fam.  Nolanacece. — ( Dicondra  repens). 

Fam.  Moreacece. — ( Broussonetia  papyrifera). 

Fam.  Eupatoriceoe. — Pukapuka  (. Brachyglotis  repanda ,)  a 
handsome  shrub  ; the  leaves  are  very  large  and  white  under- 
neath ; when  the  natives  first  saw  paper,  they  compared  it  to 
these  leaves,  and  hence  both  it  and  books  in  general  are 
called  puka  puka.  Warangi , ( — rani, — rotundifolia.) 

Fam.  Juncacece. — Kowarawara  ( astelia  Banksi/i).  It  grows 
as  an  epiphyte,  and  also  in  swampy  places.  Luzula  picta , 
astelia  solandri,  juncusmaritimus, — effusus — - filiformis ) . 

Fam.  Aracece. — Taro  ( calidium  esculentum).  This  plant 
was  introduced  by  the  natives  when  they  first  came ; it  is 
cultivated  as  an  article  of  food. 

Fam.  Typhaceoe. — j Raupo  (typha  augustifolio) . 

Fam.  Nymphceacece.  A beautiful  white  water  lily,  recently 
discovered  in  the  Middle  Island. 

Fam.  Juncaginacoe. — ( Triglochin  Jlaccidum) . 

Fam.  Naiadacece. — ( Potamogeton  natans .) 

Fam.  Graminacece. — ( Agrostis  crinita, — ovata , — rigida, — 
procera, — conspicua, — cemula , — Billiardieri — Forsteri , — pi- 
losa,)  patiti,  ( Phalaris  canariensis,  Danthonia  pallida,  Bromus 
Australis,  Schenodorus  littoralis , Triticum  scabrum, — repens , 
Poa  Australis, — imbecilla , — ccespitosa , — Paspalum  orbiculure, 
Rottboellia  uniflora ,)  moa , (spinifex  sericeus, — with  a prickly 
ball  of  flowers, — arena  antarlica,)  kakaho,  toetoe,  ( arundo 


BOTANY. 


695 


Australis) ; this  is  an  elegant  growing  plant ; it  attains  a 
height  of  about  six  feet ; the  flowering  stalk  is  nearly  twice 
that  height,  terminated  by  a fine  waving  plume ; it  is  used 
to  line  their  houses  with,  and  looks  extremely  neat ; the  stalk 
is  called  kahaho,  the  leaf  toetoe. 

Karetu , (Torresia  redolens,)  a sweet-scented  grass. 

Of  the  numerous  families  of  sedges,  ferns,  &c.,  the  follow- 
ing may  suffice  : — 

Fam.  Gyperacece. — Toetoe , ( Lepidosper-ma  elatior,)  a coarse 
cutting  grass ; there  are  twenty  other  varieties  of  the  same 
family  : a general  name  for  sedges. 

Fam.  j Restiacece. — Wiwi,  Leptocavpus  simplex , a general 
name  for  rushes. 

Fam.  Polyodiacece — Huruhuru  whenua  ( Asplenium  Lucidum, 
Falcatum , — polyodon , — obliquum, — obtusatum  ,—flab~  llifolium , 
— bulbiferum ,)  ota  (nip hobolus -bicolor.) 

Raorao , aruhe,  (Pteris  esculenta  ; ) — tuakura , ( DicJcsonia 
squarrosa  ;) — ponga,  (cyathea  dealbata  ;) — korau}  mamaku , 
(ryathea  medularis).  The  stem  of  this  fern  tree  is  eaten. 

Mouku,  paratawiti  (marattia  elegans).  A beautiful  fern, 
with  an  edible  root  not  unlike  the  bulbous  scales  of  the  white 
lily. 

Fam.  Gleicheniacece. — Waewaekaka  Gleichenia  hecysto- 
phylla ,)  kopakopa,  (Tnchomenes  reniforme).  A beautiful 
circular-leafed  fern,  with  the  fructification  on  its  edges. 

Fam.  Osmundacece. — Mange  mange  Lyg odium  articulatum) . 
A beautiful  climbing  fern,  used  in  building. 

Fam.  Ophioylosscece. — Ti  taranaki  ( Botrychium  Australe). 
A remarkable  plant,  abundant  in  the  grassy  plains.  It  was 
formerly  eaten. 

F am . Lycopodiacece. — (Lycopodium  lessonianum , — densum , 
cernuum , — flagellaria,  — later  ale, — phlegmaria , — volubile , — 
d’Urvillceit  mesipteris  Forsterii) ; all  the  plants  belonging  to 
this  family  are  very  beautiful.  The  Jungermannia  is  a very 
large  family ; the  Hepaticece  also,  and  the  Musci,  calyptrati, 
mosses  and  liver  worts,  many  of  which  are  very  beautiful, 
and  extremely  numerous ; several  of  the  fungi  are  edible  ; 
horses  and  cows  have  introduced  the  English  mushroom  ; 


696 


BOTANY. 


varieties  of  the  truffle  and  rnorell  are  also  found.  New  Zea- 
land is  rich  in  its  Algce,  some' of  them  are  edible ; one  kind, 
rimu,  similar  to  the  chondus  crispus,  or  carrigeen  moss,  is 
boiled  with  the  juice  of  the  tupakihi;  rimuroa  a large  tubular 
variety,  is  roasted  and  eaten. 

Such  is  the  brief  sketch  of  the  New  Zealand  flora,  por- 
tions of  it  may  be  found  in  the  islands  to  the  north;  in 
corroboration  of  this  idea,  three  New  Zealand  plants  have 
been  discovered  on  the  lofty  mountain  of  Kini-balu,  in  Borneo, 
under  the  equator,  and  these,  too,  of  the  most  peculiar  ant- 
arctic New  Zealand  and  Tasmanian  genera,  viz.,  Drapetes , 
Phyllocladus,  Drimys*  and  it  remains  to  be  proved  whether 
even  the  kauri  itself,  or  a variety  of  it,  may  not  be  found  on 
the  south-western  coast  of  New  Zealand. f 

Thus,  the  wonderful  way  in  which  the  various  flora  of  our 
earth  blend  with  each  other,  clearly  establish  the  harmonious 
unity  of  the  whole ; in  Australia,  everything  blooms  in  winter ; 
in  fact,  the  seasons  are  reversed  : the  trees  which  retain  their 
foliage  in  winter,  shed  it  in  summer,  and  the  wintry  winds, 
whose  dismal  howl  tells  us  that  summer  is  past,  are  there 
represented  by  the  hot  winds  of  summer,  which  make  the 
same  mournful  noise,  and  have  the  same  parching,  withering 
effect  on  vegetation  as  our  wintry  ones ; this  is  not  the  case 
in  New  Zealand ; there  the  trees,  indeed,  shed  their  old 
leaves  in  summer,  but  the  forest  is  ever  green,  and  little 
difference  is  perceptible  to  mark  the  roll  of  seasons  : an 
equable  climate  produces  an  equable  vegetation. 

Pact  o te  Reinga. — This  singular  plant  is  a parasite,  which, 
unlike  others  found  on  branches,  attaches  itself  to  the  roots 
of  trees  and  blooms  underground,  though  a few  of  the  flowers 
occasionally  appear  above  the  surface ; the  natives  say  it  is 
allied  to  the  Freicenetia,  kie-kie , it  certainly  bears  some 
resemblance  in  form  to  the  Tawera,  the  flower  of  the  Ide-kie , 
which  may  account  for  its  being  likened  to  it ; but  in  every 
other  respect  it  is  quite  different,  having  no  leaves,  but  the 
stalk  is  covered  with  brown  scales,  the  petals  of  the  flower 

* See  Dr.  Hooker’s  Introductory  Essay,  page  36. 

f See  Brenner's  Journal , who  states  that  he  there  met  with  the  kauri. 


A NEW  ZEALAND  UNDERGROUND  PARASITE. 


BOTANY. 


697 


are  slightly  tinged  with  pink  in  the  centre,  but  in  general 
they  are  of  a dirty  white  or  brown  color,  and  transparent, 
the  stamens  are  white,  the  flowers  have  a strong  smell,  partly 
fragrant,  although  earthy  and  unpleasant ; this  plant  forms 
a large  excrescence  on  the  root  of  the  Tataha , Pittosporum, 
which  is  covered  with  warts,  these  increase  and  become 
buds,  a dozen  or  more  flowers  are  often  on  one  stem.  I first 
met  with  it  on  a mountain  range  near  Hikurangi,  returning 
from  Taupo,  and  noticed  it  growing  amongst  the  roots  of  a 
tree  near  the  path ; I tried  to  discover  its  root,  but  in  vain, 
not  having  anything  but  a pocket  knife  to  dig  with ; how- 
ever, I secured  one  flower  and  its  stalk,  which  appeared  above 
the  surface.  Mr.  Nairn,  a settler,  told  me  he  had  seen  a 
similar  parasite  in  the  forest  at  the  base  of  Mount  Tara- 
naki, this  was  also  attached  to  the  root  of  a tree,  and  had 
a number  of  flowers  upon  it  of  a light  blue  color.  Mr. 
Williamson  afterwards  brought  me  another  specimen,  which 
he  had  found  in  clearing  some  ground  ; the  whole  plant  and 
flowers  were  entirely  covered  with  vegetable  mould,  the  stem 
between  the  bracts  was  of  a rusty  brown,  there  were  twenty- 
five  flowers  open  at  once,  another  excrescence  had  eighteen ; 
he  states  the  odour  of  one  plant  was  something  like  that  of  a 
ripe  melon,  whilst  the  other  had  also  a disagreable  earthy 
smell. 

Extract  from  a paper  of  the  Linnean  Society. 

“ No.  XXXVI. — On  a new  Genus  of  Balanophorea3  from 

New  Zealand,  and  the  Two  New  Species  of  Balano- 

phora.  By  J.  D.  Hooker,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  & L.S.,  &c. 

Read  June  16th,  1859. 

“ Since  laying  before  the  Linnean  Society  my  observations 
on  the  structure  and  affinities  of  Balanophorece ,*  I have 
received  two  additional  species  of  Balanophora , and  a re- 
markable new  genus  of  the  Order,  which  I shall  now  proceed 
to  describe  under  the  name  of  Dactylanthus. 


Page  i of  this  volume. 


698 


BOTANY. 


D ACT YLAN THUS,  11.  g. 

“ Diocmn.  Rhizoma  tuberosum,  lobatum.  Pcdunculi  plurimi, 
squamati,  apice  spadices  plurimos  gerentes.  Flores  in 
spadices  dense  conferti,  inferiores  dissiti.  Fl.  masc. 
Stamen  solitarium  sessile,  filamento  brevissimo,  antbera 
2-loculari.  Fl.  fcem.  Perianthium  ovario  globoso  sub- 
sessili  adnatnm,  lobis  2-8  snbnlatis,  stylo  filiformi,  stig- 
mate  simplici. 

“ Dactylanthus  Taylort,  H.  f,  (Tab.  LXXXY.  A.) 

“ Hob.  Nova  Zelandia  ad  radices  Fagi  et  Pittospori  montibus 
prope  Wanganui,  alt.  4000  ped.  (Rev.  R.  Taylor , M.A.) 
Nom.  vern.  Pua  reinga  (Flos  Hades). 

“ Rhizoma  magnitudine  pugilli  et  ultra,  tuberculatum,  super- 
ficie  celluloso,  pustulis  papillisve  nullis,  intus  sicco  rubrum. 
Pedunculi  numerosi,  4-6  unc.  alti,  sicco  fragiles,  rugulosi, 
opaci,  ferruginei,  intus  rufeseentes,  squamis  imbricatis 
laxe  tecti,  apice  in  receptaculum  floriferum  dilatati. 
Squamae  oblongae,  obtuse,  lata  basi  sessiles,  inferiores 
dissitae,  \ unc.  longae,  brunneae,  superiores  sensim  ma- 
jores,  supremae  inflorescentiam  involucrantes,  1-2  unc. 
longae,  lineari- oblongae,  membranceae,  albae  medio  sordide 
brunncae  v.  rubrae.  Spadices  (v.  pedicelli  fioriferi)  10-30, 
conferti,  erecti,  1-2  unc.  longi,  cylindracei  v.  fusiformes, 
crassitie  pennae  cervinae,  stipitati,  basi  nudi  v.  floribus 
deformatis  bracteolati.  Flores  dense  conferti.  Masc. 
Stamen  solitarium  nudum,  sessile,  filamento  brevissimo 
crasso  ; anthera  adnata,  2-locularis,  transverse  oblonga, 
rimis  subverticalibus  dcbiscens,  loculis  crassiusculis,  in- 
feriores in  spica  imperfectae  dissitae  stipitatae.  Pollen 
pallidum,  globosum.  Fl.  foem.  sicco  nigri,  sub  unc. 
longi.  Ovarium  stipitatum,  subglobosum.  Perianthium 
supra  ovarium  paulo  augustatum,  deinbi-,  rarius  8-parti- 
tum,  a dorso  compressum.  cum  stylo  connatum  ; seg- 
mentis  respectu  axegs  lateralibus,  subulatis,  inaequalibus. 
Stylus  cylindricus,  teres,  superne  paulo  inc.  assatus,  apice 
obtusus. — ‘ Planta  viva  odorem  subgratum  Melonis,  sed 
demum  ingratum  humi  spirat-’ — Taylor. 

“ For  a specimen  of  tbis  singular  plant  I am  indebted  to 
my  friend  the  Rev.  R.  Taylor,  of  New  Zealand,  who  brought 


BOTANY. 


699 


a fragment  of  it  to  England  in  1856,  and  on  my  pointing 
out  its  probable  interest,  promised  to  procure  more  on  his 
return  to  New  Zealand,  this  he  did ; and  early  in  the  pre- 
sent year  I had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  from  him  a dried 
specimen  of  the  female  plant,  a perfect  male  inflorescence  in 
a letter,  and  a pen  and  ink  sketch  of  the  peduncle  and  flowers, 
with  notes  on  the  same.  Owing  to  the  great  contraction  of 
the  cellular  tissue,  and  blackening  and  fragility  of  the  only 
entire  specimen,  which  was  unfortunately  loosely  packed  in  a 
box  and  much  damaged,  I have  had  considerable  difficulty  in 
so  restoring  the  parts  as  to  enable  Mr.  Fitch  to  complete  the 
accompanying  Plate,  and  myself  to  make  the  necessary 
analysis. 

“ The  most  remarkable  character  of  Dadylanthus  is  its 
inflorescence,  which,  instead  of  presenting  the  solitary  capi- 
tulum  or  spadix  of  most  of  its  allies,  or  the  branched  character 
of  Sarcophyte , consists  of  numerous  erect  spadices,  densely 
covered  with  flowers.  Of  these  the  males  consist  of  a solitary 
stamen,  not  articulate  with  the  spadix,  and  without  any  trace 
of  perianth,  and  hence  present  by  far  the  most  reduced  form 
of  male  flower  in  the  Order.  The  female  spadices  present  a 
crinite  appearance  from  the  long  flexuose  styles  of  the  flowers. 
The  ovary  appears  to  be  compressed,  furnished  with  a short 
thick  stipes,  and  its  upper  part  is  contracted  into  a short 
thick  neck,  apparently  consisting  of  the  tube  of  the  perianth 
connate  with  the  base  of  the  style  : this  contracted  part 
varies  much  in  width  and  breadth,  and  sometimes  appears 
as  if  reduced  to  the  adnate  bases  of  the  subulate  lobes  of  the 
perianth. 

“ I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the  nature  either  of  the 
contents  of  the  ovary,  which  is  extremely  minute,  and  crum- 
bles into  black  powder  on  being  touched,  or  of  the  tissues  of 
the  rhizome  and  peduncle,  which  do  not  seem  to  differ 
materially  from  those  of  other  Balanophorece. 

“ The  position  of  Dactyl cinthus  is  amongst  my  first  group 
of  Balanophorece,  the  Monostyli ; but  in  many  respects  it 
partakes  of  the  structure  of  various  genera  of  Distyli,  and  is 
not  very  nearly  related  to  any  described  genus.  In  habit  it 


700 


BOTANY. 


presents  the  rhizome  of  Balanophora.  In  the  male  flowers 
reduced  to  a solitary  stamen,  it  agrees  with  Loplwphytum 
and  Thonningia,  arid  in  the  subulate  perianth-lobes  of  the 
female  flower  with  Gynomorium . Upon  the  whole  it  may 
perhaps  rank  nearest  to  Thonningia , with  which  it  agrees  in 
habit,  in  some  points  of  structure  of  the  female  flower, 
especially  in  the  tube  of  the  perianth  being  connate  with 
the  style  above  the  ovary,  in  the  absence  of  imperfect  flowers 
amongst  the  females,  of  bracts,  and  of  a perianth  to  the  male 
flower. 

“ The  natives  of  New  Zealand  call  this  plant  f Flower  of 
Hades/  because  it  grows  almost  buried  in  the  soil ; they 
further  consider  it  allied  to  Freycinetia , which  it  strikingly 
resembles  in  the  inflorescence. 

“ Mr.  Taylor  informs  me  that  he  has  heard  vaguely  of  the 
existence  of  another  species  with  blue  flowers  in  the  forests 
of  Mount  Egmont.”  * 

Marattia  Flegans. — This  rare  and  beautiful  fern  is  not 
found  south  of  New  Plymouth,  its  habitat  is  the  dense  forest, 
and  is  generally  met  with  on  dry  declivities.  The  stem  of 
the  plant  rises  from  four  to  eight  inches  from  the  ground, 
and  is  composed  of  about  a dozen  brown  scales,  not  unlike 
the  Brazilian  nut  in  shape,  but  three  times  as  large,  at- 
tached like  the  scales  of  the  white  lily ; the  leaves  are 
from  five  to  ten  feet  long,  remarkably  slender,  and  of  a dark 
glossy  green : when  these  scales  are  roasted,  and  the  outer 
rind  scraped  off,  the  farinaceous  substance  within  has  a 
pinkish  hue.  In  one  of  my  journeys  up  the  Waitara,  my 
natives  espied  a bed  of  these  plants,  they  all  rushed  forward 
and  had  a regular  scramble  for  them,  wondering  what  was 
the  cause  of  the  excitement,  I also  ran  and  obtained  a share ; 
they  were  soon  stripped,  a fire  made,  and  the  scales  roasted, 
they  were  sweet  and  mealy,  and  pronounced  excellent ; if 
this  fern  could  be  raised  in  any  quantity  by  cultivation  it 
would  be  valuable  as  a delicate  article  of  food : it  is  a con- 

* Explanation  of  the  Plate. 

Fig.  I,  spike,  nat.  size.  Figs.  2 and  3,  stamens.  Fig.  4,  pollen  : — all  mag- 
nified. Fig  5,  spike,  nat.  size.  Figs  6,  7.  & 8,  flowers,  magnified. 


BOTANY. 


701 


necting  link  with  the  fern  tree,  and  was  formerly  cultivated  ; 
it  is  easily  raised  by  setting  the  scales,  which  bear  cutting 
like  the  potatoe,  its  slow  growth  is  the  only  objection. 

The  Arabia  polaris  is  one  of  the  most  singular  plants  of 
the  Auckland  isles,  growing  in  large  orbicular  masses  on 
rocks  and  banks,  near  the  sea,  or  amongst  the  dense  and 
gloomy  vegetation  of  the  woods  and  swamps  ; it  is  singular 
that  the  same  plant  should  flourish  in  such  dissimilar  locali- 
ties, it  has  proved  a great  blessing  to  shipwrecked  mariners, 
who  have  almost  lived  upon  it,  and  containing  much  sac- 
charine matter  affords  considerable  nourishment,  its  copious 
bright  green  foliage  and  large  umbels  of  waxy  flowers  have  a 
most  striking  appearance.*  Some  of  the  sailors  who  have 
been  cast  away  on  the  Auckland  Isles,  brewed  beer  from  it. 

The  palm  tree  is  found  in  every  part  of  the  Northern 
Island,  and,  perhaps,  to  lat.  43  south,  the  fern  tree  46,  the 
kauri  38,  the  puriri  39,  the  mangrove  37,  the  taraire  37,  the 
pohutukawa  39,  the  hutu  35. 

The  Beech,  betulus,  commences  in  lat.  39,  and  extends 
south  to  the  Auckland  Isles.  Most  of  the  remarks  upon  cli- 
mate made  by  different  authors  chiefly  apply  to  the  sea  coast. 

Raupo,  or  bulrush  of  New  Zealand.  When  I first  went  to 
my  station  at  Wanganui,  an  old  tohunga,  who  was  well 
acquainted  with  the  botany  of  his  country  so  far  as  related 
to  plants  suitable  for  food  or  medicine,  used  to  take  me  into 
the  parts  where  different  edible  substances  grew,  that  as  he 
said  I might  never  be  at  a loss  to  find  food  on  any  of  my 
journeys  when  in  want  of  it.  Amongst  other  things  he 
pointed  out  the  raupo,  and  pulling  up  a plant  of  it  out  of  the 
water  he  took  its  large  root,  and  peeling  off  the  outer  skin 
bid  me  eat  it;  I found  it  contained  a mass  of  farinaceous 
matter,  intersected  with  fibres,  when  chewed  it  had  a some- 
what agreeable  flavor  of  vanilla;  he  told  me  it  was  quite 
wholesome  and  nourishing,  and  I have  no  doubt  this  might 
be  turned  to  account.  The  long  broad  leaves  of  this  plant 
are  used  in  building  their  houses,  as  is  implied  by  the  name 
Raupo,  leaves  to  form  a shelter  at  night,  and  the  pollen, 
* Flora  antarctica,  p.  20. 


702 


BOTANY. 


or  pua,  of  which  bread  is  made,  seems  to  derive  its  name 
from  the  flower  dust  blown  about  by  the  wind,  pua,  or  pua- 
wai,  therefore,  becomes  the  general  name  for  all  flowers. 
Thus  both  the  root  and  pollen  are  used  for  food  and  the 
leaves  for  house  building. 

Toitoi.  It  is  to  be  remarked  of  this  beautiful  and  orna- 
mental grass  that  its  seed  is  so  minute  as  scarcely  to  be 
perceptible,  and  that  it  produces  a long  narrow  grain-like 
substance  of  irregular  form  and  blackish  purple  color,  which 
is  often  in  such  large  quantities  as  to  be  mistaken  for  a skin- 
less grain,  though  in  reality  it  is  allied  to  the  ergot  of  rye. 

Aciphylla  Taramea.  The  leaves  of  the  Spaniard  are  often 
near  two  feet  long,  stiff  and  sharp  pointed,  they  are  covered 
with  a resinous  substance,  this  the  natives  collect,  and  form 
into  a fragrant  balsam,  which  is  highly  prized : for  the  making 
of  it  the  following  is  the  prescription  : — 

Take  the  moki  moki  an  aromatic  fern,  the  resin  of  the 
tarata  a pittosporum,  the  kopura  a fragrant  mountain  moss, 
with  the  aromatic  root  of  the  patotara  a diminutive  epacris, 
the  leaves  of  the  karetu  a fragrant  grass,  and  the  whihoi  a 
taupo  plant,  these  are  subjected  to  heat  and  formed  into 
a resinous  lump ; to  make  it  into  a pomatum  this  is  mixed 
with  lard  and  melted  together,  it  is  then  strained  and  is  highly 
prized  by  the  Maori  exquisites. 


Hieroglyphics  found  on  Pitcairn’s  Island,  a specimen  of  a lost  language,  and  a representation 
of  an  enormous  bird. 


MAORI  WAR  TRUMPETS. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

CHRONOLOGY. 

Haying  begun  with  tlie  traditions  of  the  natives  anterior  to 
the  arrival  of  the  European,  I shall  conclude  with  briefly 
considering  the  country's  subsequent  history.  It  seems  re- 
markable that  so  large  a portion  of  our  globe  should  have 
remained  totally  unknown  to  the  nations  of  the  west,  until  a 
comparatively  recent  period,  and  that  then  the  thick  mist, 
which  had  shut  out  these  portions  of  the  globe,  from  our 
sight,  should  all  at  once  be  rolled  aside,  and  reveal  them  to 
us.  Either  the  family  of  man  was  not  before  sufficiently 
advanced  to  profit  by  the  discovery,  or  the  Anglo-Saxon  race 
which  was  destined  to  colonize  them,  was  not  earlier  in  a 
position  to  do  so. 


704 


CHRONOLOGY. 


It  was  doubtless  appointed  that  tbe  discoveries  of  Colum- 
bus should  first  be  peopled,  and  when  the  way  for  their 
being  so  was  opened  out,  that  then  the  attention  of  our  age 
should  be  directed  to  Australasia  and  Polynesia. 

The  earliest  claim  set  up  for  the  discovery  of  New  Zealand 
is  advanced  by  the  French,  in  behalf  of  their  countryman, 
the  Sieur  Binot  Paulnier,  who  sailed  from  France  in  June 
1503,  pursuing  a south-west  course  to  60°  south  lat. ; he 
then  veered  towards  the  west  north-west  and  north-west, 
when  he  fell  in  with  many  strange  lands,  and  finally  reached 
a large  continent,  peopled  by  a numerous  race  of  amiable 
savages,  amongst  whom  he  remained  nearly  a year,  and 
quitted  with  regret  July  3,  1504.  The  son  of  one  of  the 
chiefs  accompanied  him  to  France,  and  afterwards  married 
into  his  family  ; the  account  of  his  course  is  too  vague  to 
make  out  anything  satisfactory  from  it,  but  there  is  little 
probability  that  his  amiable  savages  were  New  Zealanders 
as  they  would  have  been  more  inclined  to  regard  the  Sieur  as 
a fit  subject  upon  whom  to  exercise  their  gastronomic  powers. 
The  description  seems  rather  to  apply  to  the  natives  of  the 
Philippine  Isles,  and  this  west  north-west  and  north-west 
course  was  as  likely  to  bring  him  there  as  to  New  Zealand. 

1576,  Juan  Fernandez  sailed  from  Southwestern  America 
for  about  a month,  in  a south-west  direction,  and  reached  a 
land,  fertile  and  pleasant,  inhabited  by  white  people,  well 
made,  and  dressed  in  a kind  of  woven  cloth.  This  also  is 
a very  vague  account : the  description  will  apply  to  the  Ta- 
li aiti  an  as  well  as  to  the  New  Zealander,  and  the  length  of 
the  voyage  would  be  more  likely  to  bring  him  to  that  island 
than  to  New  Zealand ; for  even  in  the  present  day,  six  weeks 
is  considered  a quick  passage  from  New  Zealand  to  South 
America. 

1642,  14th  of  August,  Abel  Tasman  sailed  from  Batavia 
with  two  vessels,  the  Heemshirk  and  the  Zeehaen ; on  the 
9th  of  September,  he  was  in  lat.  42°  37'  south,  and  Ion.  176° 
29',  the  variation  being  3°  to  the  east;  on  the  13th,  being 
in  lat.  43°  10',  variation  7°  30'  east,  he  discovered  a high 
mountainous  country.  The  natives  played  on  a kind  of 


CHRONOLOGY. 


705 


trumpet,  they  were  of  a color  between  brown  and  yellow, 
their  hair  was  long,  and  almost  as  thick  as  that  of  the  Japa- 
nese, combed  up  and  fixed  with  a quill,  or  some  such  thing, 
in  the  very  same  manner  that  the  Japanese  fastened  their 
hair.  On  the  19th  of  December  they  killed  three  of  his  men ; 
he  gave  the  place  the  name  of  Murderer’s  Bay. 

1643,  4th  of  January,  he  sighted  the  North-West  Cape 
and  the  Three  Kings  ; to  the  former  of  which  he  gave  the 
name  of  Maria  Van  Diemen,  in  honor  of  the  daughter  of  the 
Governor  of  Batavia ; and  afterwards,  to  his  discovery  was 
given  the  name  of  New  Zealand,  from  that  of  his  own  country. 
Tasman,  however,  was  not  aware  of  the  land  being  insular, 
but  supposed  that  it  formed  a portion  of  the  Terra  Australis 
Incognita,  and  therefore  called  it  Staten  Land. 

8th  October  1769,  and  in  1777,  Cook  landed  in  New 
Zealand  during  his  circumnavigations  of  the  world  : he  sur- 
veyed the  coasts  of  both  islands  with  such  accuracy,  that 
substantially  the  charts  still  used  are  his  ; he  discovered  the 
Straits  which  separate  the  two  largest  islands,  to  which  his 
own  name  was  affixed,  and  took  possession  of  them  for 
England ; so  high  was  the  opinion  which  he  formed  of  their 
fertility  and  importance,  that  he  suggested  their  immediate 
colonization;  and  in  1788  the  question  was  agitated  in  Par- 
liament, whether  New  South  Wales  or  New  Zealand  should 
be  made  a penal  settlement ; that  clear-sighted  and  observing 
man  also  recommended  the  very  spot  which  Auckland  now 
occupies,  as  the  most  suitable  locality  for  the  capital.  Be- 
tween the  visits  of  Cook,  the  massacre  of  Captain  Furneux’s 
crew  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  together  with  that  of  the  Mascarin, 
commanded  by  Marion  du  Fresne,  took  place,  which  appears 
to  have  been  occasioned  in  a great  measure  by  their  own 
injudicious  conduct. 

Every  recollection  of  Cook  is  interesting.  There  are  several 
springs  in  the  different  places  where  he  anchored  which  still 
go  by  his  name ; one  at  Uaua,  in  Tologa  Bay,  on  the  East 
Coast,  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  the  natives,  but  the  chief 
record  of  his  having  been  on  the  island,  is  the  cabbage  and 
turnip  which  he  sowed  in  various  places,  these  have  spread 


706 


CHRONOLOGY. 


and  become  quite  naturalized,  growing  everywhere  in  the 
greatest  abundance,  and  affording  an  inexhaustible  supply 
of  excellent  vegetables.  There  is  a saying,  which  I fear  is 
not  so  much  to  Goofs  credit,  as  it  intimates  that  he  gave 
them  rum — “ Te  wai  tohi  a rangi  ” — (Goofs  sweet  water  of 
heaven,)  which  passed  into  a proverb  for  anything  sweet. 
It  is  interesting  to  know  that  the  natives  regarded  Tupaia, 
the  Tahaitian  chief,  as  the  captain  ; he  must,  therefore,  have 
passed  himself  off  as  being  such  when  he  acted  as  interpreter. 

Marion  has  also  left  some  remembrance  of  himself,  showing 
how  different  the  French  taste  is  from  that  of  the  English, 
he  sowed  garlick,  which  has  quite  taken  possession  of  the 
Bay  of  Islands  ; the  milk  and  butter  there  is  all  more  or  less 
flavored  with  that  delicious  root.  A better  gift,  was,  I 
believe,  the  Kowai-ngutu-kaka,  ( CUanthus  Puniceus),  which 
most  probably  was  introduced  by  his  ship.  The  Taranaki 
slaves,  when  released  by  the  Nga-puhi  on  their  embracing 
Ghristianity,  took  the  seed  with  them  as  a remembrance 
of  the  land  of  their  captivity.  The  natives  of  Goofs  Straits 
have  a tradition  that  some  vessel  arrived  at  Arapawa,  Queen 
Charlotte^s  Sound,  before  Captain  Cook  ; they  call  the  cap- 
tain Bongo  tute ; the  crew  committed  such  excesses,  that 
the  natives  became  exasperated,  and  took  the  vessel,  killing 
the  entire  crew,  and  eating  them ; having  stripped  the 
vessel  they  left  the  hull  on  the  beach ; amongst  the  plunder 
were  a number  of  dinner  plates,  which  from  their  pattern 
were  called  Te  upoko  o Bewarewa ; as  this  is  the  name  of  a 
disease  which  many  years  ago  broke  out  amongst  them,  and 
destroyed  great  numbers,  it  may  have  been  given,  from 
its  being  a spotted  pattern,  the  disease  appearing  to  have 
resembled  the  small  pox,  leaving  marks  all  over  their 
bodies ; these  plates  were  broken  up,  and  having  drilled  holes 
through  the  fragments,  they  wore  them  as  ear  and  breast 
ornaments  ; one  thing  taken  is  said  to  have  been  shaped  like 
a mere,  and  was  therefore  very  highly  prized ; it  is  still  in 
the  possession  of  some  one  belonging  to  the  Nga-te-hine 
tribe ; the  natives  say  this  was  the  first  time  they  ever  saw 
iron,  and  adzes  were  made  of  the  spike  nails. 


CHRONOLOGY. 


707 


1793,  whaling  ships  began  to  visit  New  Zealand. 

1814,  19th  December,  Mr.  Marsden,  the  senior  chaplain 
of  New  South  Wales.,  first  landed  at  the  Cavallos;  and  on 
Christmas  day  following,  the  Gospel  was  preached  for  the 
first  time  at  Rangihu,  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  from  the  ap- 
propriate text,  “ Behold,  I bring  you  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy.” — Luke  ii.,  10. 

1818,  the  Chiefs  Te  Teri  and  Tui,  visited  England. 

1820,  Hongi  and  Waikato  accompanied  Mr.  Kendal  to 
England,  when  Professor  Lee  drew  up  the  New  Zealand 
grammar.  Three  years  later,  the  Wesleyans  commenced  a 
station  at  Wangaroa ; it  was  soon  burnt  down,  and  they 
were  obliged  for  a time  to  leave  the  country. 

1825,  a company  was  formed  in  London  to  colonize  New 
Zealand.  George  Lyall,  Stewart  Majoribanks,  George  Palmer, 
Colonel  Torrens,  the  Earl  of  Durham,  Edward  Ellice,  &c., 
land  was  bought  at  Hokianga  Heads,  Hurd’s  Point,  and  at 
the  Thames,  but  the  scheme  fell  to  the  ground. 

1827,  the  whale  fishery  was  established  in  the  Middle 
Island,  and  in  Foveaux's  Straits. 

1828,  the  Wesleyans  commenced  a station  at  Hokianga. 

1831,  a letter  was  sent  to  William  IV.,  applying  for  British 

protection,  signed  by  thirteen  of  the  Bay  of  Islands'  Chiefs ; 
this  led  to  the  appointment  of  Mr.  Busby,  as  British  resident, 
but  having  no  means  placed  at  his  disposal  for  maintaining 
his  authority,  the  natives  facetiously  described  him  as  a man- 
of-war  without  guns. 

1835,  a confederation  of  the  Bay  of  Islands’  tribes  was 
formed,  and  acknowledged  by  Great  Britain,  and  a flag  was 
given  them  as  a token  of  their  independence. 

1 836,  the  Church  Missions  were  extended  to  the  Thames, 
Tauranga,  Kotorua,  and  Waikato. 

1837,  the  New  Zealand  Land  Company  was  formed  under 
the  auspices  of  the  Earl  of  Durham  and  other  gentlemen. 

1838,  the  Bishop  of  Australia  paid  a pastoral  visit,  and 
held  a Confirmation  at  the  Bay  of  Islands ; he  also  conse- 
crated a burial  ground  at  Kororareka.  At  the  same  time, 
Baron  de  Thierry,  an  adventurer,  who  styled  himself  King 


708 


CHRONOLOGY. 


of  Nukuhiva,  and  Sovereign  Chief  of  New  Zealand,  came  and 
tried  to  establish  himself  as  such  : he  brought  with  him  several 
persons  as  the  heads  of  different  departments  of  his  govern- 
ment ; but  the  natives  laughed  at  his  pretensions,  which  were 
soon  forgotten ; his  real  object  was  to  obtain  a footing  in  the 
land,  and  then  transfer  his  claims  to  the  French. 

1837,  the  New  Testament  was  first  printed  at  the  Mission 
Press  of  Paihia ; it  has  had  a remarkable  influence  on  the 
country,  and  not  only  tended  to  assimilate  the  language 
throughout  the  island,  and  fix  it,  but  has  been  the  grand 
means  of  destroying  heathenism  in  New  Zealand.  The  same 
vessel  which  brought  the  Maori  New  Testament  from  Sydney, 
where  it  was  sent  to  be  bound,  also  conveyed  Bishop  Pompa- 
lier  and  his  staff,  to  found  a Mission  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 
The  Rev.  Samuel  Marsden  likewise  paid  his  seventh  and 
last  visit  to  the  country ; he  went  to  see  all  the  churches 
which  he  had  been  the  honored  instrument  of  founding.  The 
natives  received  him  with  the  greatest  respect,  and  the  largest 
number  ever  assembled  together,  met  to  honor  the  father  of 
the  Gospel  in  New  Zealand  ; he  was  then  nearly  seventy-two, 
and  died  the  following  year.  Thus,  in  the  same  year,  three 
great  events  occurred: — 1.  The  arrival  of  the  Maori  New 
Testament;  2.  Of  Mr.  Marsden,  the  founder  of  the  Mission, 
who  thus  saw  the  Scriptures  in  the  Maori  tongue,  the  earnest 
of  success  and  the  antidote  to  false  doctrine;  3.  The  Roman 
Catholic  Church  Mission  commenced. 

1839,  the  Kapiti  Mission  was  commenced;  the  New 
Zealand  Land  Company  was  re-established,  and  obtained 
a charter.  In  August  of  the  same  year.  Captain  Hobson, 
R.N.,  received  a commission  as  Consul  and  Lieutenant- 
Governor  of  New  Zealand,  depending  on  the  submission 
of  the  natives  to  the  Queers  authority ; and  in  February 
1840,  a grand  Council  was  held  at  Waitangi,  when  all  the 
Chiefs  of  that  part  of  the  Island  accepted  the  Queen's 
supremacy  ; a treaty  was  entered  into  with  them,  which 
they  signed  ; this  was  mainly  accomplished  by  the  influence 
of  the  Missionary  body  and  was  called  the  treaty  of  Waitangi, 
from  the  place  of  the  meeting ; a second  Council  was  held  at 


CHRONOLOGY. 


709 


Hokianga ; the  Lieutenant-Governor  then  proclaimed  the 
British  assumption  of  sovereignty  over  the  Isles  of  New 
Zealand ; the  seat  of  government  was  fixed  at  the  Bay  of 
Islands,  the  site  being  named  Bussell. 

1840,  January  22,  Port  Nicholson  settlement  was  com- 
menced, and  the  Wanganui  Mission  founded.  A French 
expedition  arrived  at  the  Bay  of  Islands  on  the  invitation 
of  Baron  de  Thierry,  but  finding  the  North  Island  had  been 
proclaimed  a British  colony,  it  sailed  for  Akaroa,  to  take 
possession  of  the  Middle  Island,  Captain  Stanley  being  then 
in  the  Bay,  at  once  proceeded  there,  and  planted  the  British 
flag ; the  French  expedition  almost  immediately  afterwards 
arrived,  and  landed  some  settlers,  who  then  commenced  a 
colony  as  British  subjects  ; during  this  year  the  settlement 
at  Wanganui  was  founded,  also  that  at  Taranaki,  which  was 
called  New  Plymouth. 

1841,  the  Antarctic  Expedition  arrived  in  the  Bay  of 
Islands. 

1842,  the  seat  of  government  was  transferred  to  Auckland 
— te  Wai-te-Mata ; and  New  Zealand  was  declared  inde- 
pendent of  New  South  Wales.  It  also  marks  the  com- 
mencement of  the  settlement  of  Nelson,  as  well  as  the  death 
of  Captain  Hobson,  the  first  governor  of  New  Zealand,  and 
the  arrival  of  Bishop  Selwyn,  who  took  up  his  abode  at  the 
Waimate,  where  he  founded  a college.  Lieut.  W.  Shortland, 
B.A.,  became  the  acting-governor. 

1843,  the  Bev.  John  Mason  drowned  in  fording  the  Tura- 
kina  river,  January  5th.  The  fatal  affray  at  Wairau : also 
the  last  act  of  cannibalism  committed  by  Taraia  at  the  Kati 
Kati,  near  the  Thames.  In  July  Wanganui  was  disturbed 
by  severe  earthquakes.  In  December,  Captain  Fitzroy,  B.N., 
arrived ; he  issued  debentures  as  low  as  half-a-crown. 

1844,  the  Governor  declared  the  ports  of  New  Zealand 
free;  abolished  all  customs  and  duties,  and  attempted  to 
collect  a graduated  property  and  income  tax ; he  was  led  to 
adopt  this  measure  from  the  Bay  natives  complaining,  that 
since  the  island  had  become  a British  colony,  the  whalers  had 
entirely  deserted  them  ; and  having  declared  the  Bay  of 


710 


CHRONOLOGY. 


Islands  a free  port,  to  remove  the  grounds  of  their  complaint, 
he  found  that  the  same  measure  must  be  adopted  throughout 
the  country , the  plan,  therefore,  soon  failed. 

1845,  war  broke  out  in  the  north.  John  Heke  cut  down 
the  flagstaff  at  Kororareka,  having  been  told  that  it  was  the 
sign  of  their  being  slaves  ; and  on  the  11th  March  the  town 
was  taken  by  him,  who  however  displayed  much  forbearance. 

1846,  Captain  Fitzroy  was  superseded  by  Captain  Grey. 
Otakou  Settlement  founded,  now  called  Otago ; it  was  in- 
tended to  be  an  exclusively  Presbyterian  colony.  At  this 
time  the  war  at  the  Hutt  broke  out ; Rauparaha  was  seized, 
skirmishes  took  place  at  Porirua,  Paua-taha-nui,  and  in  the 
Horokiri  valley.  Wanganui  was  occupied  as  a military  sta- 
tion. 

1847,  war  broke  out  at  Wanganui,  much  powder  and  shot 
expended,  with  scarcely  any  loss  of  life  on  either  side.  The 
Bishop  and  the  Missionaries  joined  in  a protest  against  Earl 
Grey's  despatch,  relative  to  taking  possession  of  the  waste 
lands.  Governor  Grey  proclaimed  Governor-in- Chief;  and 
in  June  Lieutenant-Governor  Eyre  arrived. 

1848,  the  Canterbury  colony  founded  at  Port  Cooper,  as 
an  exclusive  Church  of  England  colony.  Lieutenant-Governor 
Enderby  also  appointed  to  the  Auckland  Isles.  Government 
House  at  Auckland  burnt  down.  Fearful  earthquakes  visited 
Wellington;  most  of  the  brick  houses  were  either  thrown 
down,  or  much  damaged ; some  were  levelled  to  the  ground, 
but  only  three  lives  were  lost. 

1850,  Governor  Enderby  recalled,  and  the  whaling  estab- 
lishment in  the  Auckland  Isles  given  up. 

1851,  a new  constitution  was  given  to  New  Zealand,  which 
was  divided  into  provinces,  with  a Superintendent  over  each, 
and  a General  Assembly.  The  discovery  of  gold  in  Australia 
drew  away  a portion  of  the  population. 

1858,  Lieutenant-Governor  Eyre  left  New  Zealand.  The 
new  constitution  was  proclaimed ; minimum  price  of  land 
reduced  to  10s.  an  acre  ; this  wise  measure  saved  the  little 
colony,  caused  an  immediate  influx  of  settlers ; and  from  that 
period  the  tide  of  emigration  has  continued  to  increase.  The 


CHRONOLOGY. 


711 


Governor-in-Chief;  Sir  George  Grey;  left;  Colonel  Wynyard 
constituted  Acting-Governor. 

1 854;  the  General  Assembly  met  at  Auckland;  and;  after 
much  disagreement;  was  dissolved. 

1855;  Rawiri  Waiawa  killed;  troops  requested  and  un- 
willingly sent  to  Taranaki  by  Colonel  Wynyard;  the  Acting- 
Governor.  October;  Colonel  Gore  Brown  arrived  as  Governor. 

Such  is  a brief  summary  of  the  principal  events  which  have 
occurred  in  New  Zealand  since  our  acquaintance  with  it;  up 
to  January  1855.  The  colony  was  then  rapidly  progressing; 
with -every  prospect  of  continuing  to  do  so.  There  have  been 
three  grand  epochs  in  the  history  of  New  Zealand  : — First; 
Its  colonization  by  the  black  race ; Secondly;  by  the  Maori ; 
and  lastly;  by  the  Anglo-Saxon.  The  steps  of  the  last  have 
been  followed  by  the  introduction  of  the  Christian  faith;  with 
the  arts  of  civilized  life ; and  the  final  result  will  be,  the 
giving  rise  to  an  energetic  and  determined  race;  destined;  at 
no  distant  period;  to  play  a conspicuous  part  in  the  future 
history  of  the  World. 


712 


THE  NEW  ZEALAND  CHIEFS  AND  THE  QUEEN. 


The  New  Zealand  Chiefs  and  the  Queen. 

The  following  Address  was  forwarded  by  Governor  Sir 
George  Grey  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  for  transmission  to 
Her  Majesty,  on  the  lamented  death  of  the  Prince  Consort : 

“ Oh  Victoria,  onr  Mother  ! — We  greet  yon  ! You,  who  are 
all  that  now  remains  to  recall  to  our  recollection  Albert,  the 
Prince  Consort,  who  can  never  again  be  gazed  upon  by  your 
people. 

“ We,  your  Maori  children,  are  now  sighing  in  sorrow  together 
with  you,  even  with  a sorrow  like  to  yours.  All  we  can  now 
do  is  to  w~eep  together  with  you.  Oh,  our  good  mother,  who 
hast  nourished  us,  your  ignorant  children  of  this  island,  even  to 
this  day! 

“ We  have  just  heard  of  the  crash  of  the  huge-headed  forest 
tree  which  has  Untimely  fallen,  ere  it  had  attained  its  full  growth 
of  greatness. 

“ Oh,  good  lady,  pray  look  with  favour  on  our  love.  Although 
we  may  have  been  perverse  children,  we  have  ever  loved  you. 

“ This  is  our  lament. 

“ Great  is  the  pain  which  preys  on  me  for  the  loss  of  my 
beloved. 

‘ ‘ Ah,  you  will  now  lie  buried  among  the  other  departed  Kings  ! 

“ They  will  leave  you  with  the  ancient  heroes  of  the  land. 

“ With  the  dead  of  the  tribes  of  the  multitude  of  ’Te  Maui. 

“ Go  fearless  then,  0 Pango,  my  beloved,  in  the  path  of  death  ; 
for  no  evil  slanders  can  follow  you. 

“ Oh  my  very  heart ! Thou  didst  shelter  me  from  the  sorrows 
and  ills  of  life. 

“ Oh  my  pet  bird,  whose  sweet  voice  welcomed  my  glad  guests. 

“ Oh  my  noble  pet  bird,  caught  in  the  forests  of  Rapaura ! 

“ Let,  then,  the  body  of  my  beloved  be  covered  with  Royal 
purple  robes  ! 

“ Let  it  be  covered  with  all  robes  ! 

“ The  great  Rewa,  my  beloved,  shall  himself  bind  these  around 
thee. 

“ And  my  ear-ring  of  precious  greenstone  shall  be  hung  in  thy  ear. 

“ Ror,  oh  ! my  most  precious  jewel,  thou  art  not  lost  to  me. 


THE  NEW  ZEALAND  CHIEFS  AND  THE  QUEEN.  713 

“ Yes,  thou,  the  pillar  that  didst  support  my  palace,  hast  been 
borne  to  the  skies. 

“ Oh,  my  beloved  ! you  used  to  stand  in  the  very  prow  of  the 
war-canoe,  inciting  all  others  to  noble  deeds.  Yes,  in  thy  lifetime 
thou  wast  great. 

“ And  now  thou  hast  departed  to  the  place  where  even  all  the 
mighty  must  at  last  go. 

“ Where,  oh  physicians,  was  the  power  of  your  remedies  ? 

“ What,  oh  priests,  availed  your  prayers! 

“ For  I have  lost  my  love  ; no  more  can  he  revisit  this  world. 


“ Matene  Te  Whiwhi. 
“ Riwai  Te  Ahu. 

“ WlREMU  TAMIHANA  Te 
Neke. 

“ Parakaia  Te  Pouepa. 
“ Horomona  Toremi. 
il  Arapata  Hauturu. 

“ Karanama  Te  Kapu 

KAI. 

“ Paraone  Te  Manuka. 
“ Murukakai. 

“ Moroati  Kiharoa. 


“ Hape  Te  Horohau. 

“ Tamihana  Te  Rauparaha. 
“ Rawiri  Te  Wanui. 

“ Kingi  Te  Ahoaho. 

“ Hanita  Te  Wharemaka- 

TEA. 

“ Hukiki. 

“ Paraone  Toangina. 

“ Hohua  Taipari. 

“ Kepa  Kerikeri. 

“ Pita  Te  Pukeroa.” 


London William  Macintosh,  24,  Paternoster  Row. 


Lately  Published , in  One  Vol.  8vo.,  price  10s.  6d.,  Cloth , 


THE  PAST  AND  PRESENT 

OP 

NEW  ZEALAND; 

WITH  ITS 

PROSPECTS  POE  THE  FUTURE. 

®it(i  xxmmmm  Jllustratioits. 


BY  THE 

REV.  RICHARD  TAYLOE,  M.A.,  F.G.S., 

AN  OLD  NEW  ZEALAND  MISSIONARY, 


Author  of 

“ TE  IKA  A MAUI  ; OR,  NEW  ZEALAND  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.” 


CONTENTS. 

Sunshine  and  Shade ; or,  the  Past,  Present,  and  Future  of  the  Church  Mission 
of  New  Zealand. 

Native  Schools  and  Half-Caste  Race. 

The  English  Church. 

King  Movement. 

The  Present  Colonial  Government. — Our  Surplus  Population. — Convicts 

Confederation  of  the  Provinces  of  the  British  Empire. 

The  Geography  of  New  Zealand. — The  Isles  of  New  Zealand. — Colonization. 

Tamihana  Wiremu  Tarapipi  te  Waharoa. — John  WiUiams. — Dr.  Sinclair. — 
Bishop  Monrad Baron  de  Thierry. — A New  Zealand  Grace  Darling. 

A Lecture  delivered  at  the  Odd  Fellows’  HaU,  Wanganui,  on  its  Past,  Present, 
and  Future,  on  leaving  for  Ed  gland. 

Acclimatisation . 

Statistics. — A List  of  the  earliest  Works  printed  in  Maori — Population. — The 
Total  Number  of  Acres  in  the  possession  of  Europeans  under  Crop  in  the 
several  Electoral  Districts  in  December  1864. — Middle  Island. — The  Number 
of  Acres  in  the  possession  of  Europeans  under  Crop  in  the  several  Provinces 
in  December  1864. — Customs’  Revenue  at  the  several  Ports  for  Quarter 
ending  30th  June  1865. — Value  of  Exports  for  the  several  Provinces  during 
the  Quarter  ending  June  30th  1865.  Number  and  Tonnage  of  Vessels 
cleared  outwards  at  the  several  Ports  during  the  Quarter  ending  30th  of 

June  1865 Revenue  of  the  Provinces  for  the  Quarter  ending  30th  June 

1865. — New  Zealand  and  Australian  Tariffs. — Bank  Returns,  Quarter  ending 
31st  March  1866. — Gold  Exports  from  1861  to  30th  November  1865. — 
Revenue  of  Otago  from  1861  to  30th  September  1865. — Latitude  and  Lon- 
gitude.— Quantity  and  Value  of  Gold  exported  from  1st  April  1855  to  31st 
March  1857. — Live  Stock  in  the  possession  of  Europeans  in  the  several 
Provinces  in  December  1861. — Receipts  and  Expenditure  of  the  ordinary 
Revenue  for  the  Quarter  ending  December  31st,  1865. — Governors  of  New 
Zealand. — The  W aitangi  Treaty. 

Hints  to  Emigrants. — A Letter  from  one  of  the  earliest  Settlers  in  Wanganui. 

LONDON: 

WILLIAM  MACINTOSH, 

24,  Paternoster  Row  ; 

AND 

HENRY  IRESON  JONES,  Wanganui,  New  Zealand 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


“ Mr.  William  Macintosh,  of  Paternoster  Row,  and  Mr.  H.  I.  Jones,  of  Wanganui,  New 
Zealand,  have  just  published  a work  of  authority — if  authority  be  in  any  way  based  upon 
experience,  upon  the  state  and  prospects  of  the  ‘ Britain  of  the  South.’  It  is  a bright  and  not  too 
bulky  octavo  volume,  by  an  Old  New  Zealand  Missionary,  the  Rev.  Richard  Taylor,  M.A., 
F.G.S.  * * * * Mr.  Taylor  has  produced  a work  which  is  the  best  of  its  kind  and  perfectly 
reliable  in  its  statements  of  facts  and  opinion.  ” — Home  News. 

“The  progress  of  British  Colonization  is  something  wonderful.  When  we  glance  around  and  see 
the  British  flag  waving  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  not  merely  at  the  top  masts  of  the  vessels, 
but  on  terra  firma,  ‘ part  of  a parcel  ’ of  the  great  British  Empire,  we  cannot  but  discern  the 
hand  of  God  and  His  all-wise  resolve  to  perpetuate  the  English  voice  irrespective  of  whatever  may 
befall  the  mother  country.  * * * * Mr.  Taylor,  who  styles  himself  an  ‘Old  New  Zealand 
Missionary,’  has  written  a most  interesting  work  on  the  colony,  * * which  will  be  found  most 
useful  to  all  interested  in  New  Zealand.  The  statistical  tables  are  important,  and  the  portion  of 
the  book  treating  of  the  geography  of  the  island,  as  well  of  its  agricultural  and  other  advantages, 
with  the  sound  advice  given  to  emigrants,  make  ‘ The  Past  and  Present  of  N ew  Zealand  ’ one  of 
the  best  works  we  have  met  with  on  this  one  of  the  most  important  appendages  of  the  British 
Crown.” — Times  Review. 

‘ ‘ There  can  be  no  doubt  that  to  the  emigrant  this  work  presents  attractions  of  the  highest  order. 
It  will  be  read  by  all  who  have  friends  in  New  Zealand  with  anxious  interest,  and  to  those  who 
contemplate  a residence  in  the  Colony,  it  is  almost  an  indispensable  hand-book.” — Liverpool 
Courier. 

“ This  volume  has  for  its  author  a gentleman  who  has  passed  many  years  in  the  midst  of  the 
scenes  and  people  he  describes,  which  fact,  coupled  with  the  fair  and  candid  spirit  in  which  most  of 
the  subjects  are  treated,  will  make  the  work  valuable  as  a text-book.  * * * In  writing  of  the  war 
which  raged  for  so  many  years,  the  author  endeavours,  and  with  some  measure  of  success,  to 
reconcile  conflicting  statements,  both  to  its  origin  and  progress.  This  is,  of  course,  a task  of 
difficulty,  but  Mr.  Taylor  has  grappled  manfully  with  the  subject,  and  thrown  light  upon  many 
points,  which  were  before  obscure  even  to  those  well  acquainted  with  the  colony.  All  may  read 
this  work  with  advantage,  but  to  the  intending  emigrant  it  must  be  invaluable,  presenting  in  so 
small  a compass  so  much  really  useful  and  reliable  information.” — Ettropean  Mail. 

“ To  those  who  desire  full  particulars  of  information  respecting  the  most  inviting  of  the  British 
colonies  we  recommend  the  acquisition  of  this  well-written  and  admirable  work.  The  reverend 
author  has  devoted  the  earlier  portion  of  the  volume  to  details  of  missionary  progress  among  the 
natives  of  New  Zealand  ; and  those  who  have  doubted  the  expediency  of  introducing  Christian 
teaching  among  the  aborigines  are  likely,  on  reading  the  interesting  facts  presented  in  these  pages, 
to  considerably  modify  their  opinions.  Mr.  Taylor  is  a vigorous  advocate  of  emigration,  and 
presents  to  his  fellow-countrymen  in  eloquent  terms  the  advantages  of  seeking  in  new  and  wider 
fields  of  enterprise  an  outlet  for  their  activity  and  energies.  The  true  mode  of  avoiding  the  waste 
of  boiling  down  sheep  to  obtain  their  fat,  writes  Mr  Taylor,  is,  that  if  the  flocks  and  herds  cannot 
come  to  Britain,  Britain  should  go  them.  We  admit  the  conclusion,  and  heartily  say,  ‘Go.’” — 
The  Oak. 

“ The  Rev.  Richard  Taylor,  an  ‘Old  New  Zealand  Missionary’  has  given  to  the  world  a most 
interesting  w ork  ; and  more  particularly  such  to  those  who  have  taken  thought  in  reference  to  this 
colony,  and  of  the  sad  circumstances  which  have  taken  place  there.  * * * We  recommend  a 
perusal  of  this  most  interesting  work,  supplying,  as  it  does,  wonderful  testimonies  to  the  power  of 
Christian  teaching,  as  well  as  the  result  of  British  industry.” — Isle  of  Wight  Advertizer. 

“ The  author  was  one  of  the  early  missionaries  ; and  after  spending  many  years  in  the  islands, 
now  gives  us  the  benefit  of  his  long  and  varied  experience.  His  book  contains  a large  amount  of 
reliable  and  useful  information.  * * * In  the  first  six  chapters  he  gives  us  a very  full  and 

detailed  account  of  past  missionary  work  and  its  general  effects  in  the  whole  country.  Chapters 
VII.  and  VIII.  illustrate  the  gradual  and  lingering  strife  which,  in  all  such  cases,  takes  place 
between  barbarism  and  civilisation.  In  other  respects  these  two  chapters — containing  a good 
summary  of  the  whole  New  Zealand  War,  the  causes  which  led  to  it,  and  the  miserable  results 
which  have  followed  it — are  really  full  of  interest,  and  will  be  read  both  at  home  and  abroad.  The 
remaining  six  chapters  are  occupied  with  much  useful  informntion  concerning  the  colonial  govern- 
ment, the  surplus  population,  the  convicts,  and  the  general  geography  of  the  whole  group  of  islands . 
The  newest  and  freshest  sketch  among  them  all  is,  perhaps,  Chapter  XIII.,  which,  under  the  head 
‘ Acclimatisation,’  gives  an  account  of  all  that  has  been  done,  since  the  introduction  of  the  pig  and 
potatoe  by  Captain  Cook  down  to  the  present  time,  to  improve  the  climate  and  aid  the  productive- 
ness of  the  whole  country.” — London  Standard. 

“It  is  now  little  more  than  half  a century  since  a Protestant  missionary  first  landed  in  New 
Zealand  with  a view  of  converting  the  natives.  Mr.  Taylor  gives  us  what,  we  trust,  is  not  a 
flattering  notion  of  the  willingness  with  which  the  natives  received  the  Gospel  message  when  jt  was 
offered  them.  * * * The  account  he  gives  of  the  state  of  the  Maori  race  before  the  Gospel 
was  introduced  amongst  them,  shows  a state  of  degradation  almost  as  deep  as  could  be  desired  for 
the  sake  of  contrast  between  the  ‘before’  and ‘after’  of  the  preaching  of  Christianity.  *.  * * 

The  war  and  the  bad  example  of  those  Europeans  who  did  not  follow  up  the  work  of  the  mission- 
aries, have  had  a prejudicial  effect  on  the  conversion  of  the  natives  ; * * * but  on  the  whole,  the 
prospect  of  the  native  population  is  hopeful.  Between  the  past  and  the  present  there  is  a manifest 
change  for  the  better.  They  (the  Maories)  are  remarkable  for  their  well-formed  persons  and  their 
intellectual  powers.  One  of  them  has  shown  such  a taste  for  drawing,  that  his  European  friends 
have  sent  him  to  England  that  his  talent  may  be  the  more  successfully  cultivated.  It  is  not 
impossible,  therefore,  that  when  the  New  Zealander  comes  to  sketch  the  ruins  of  St.  Paul’s,  he 
may  have  derived  the  principles  of  his  art  from  the  Academy  in  Trafalgar  Square.” — London 
Review. 


London  : — WILLIAM  MACINTOSH,  24,  Paternoster  Row, 
and  of  all  Booksellers. 


— 


