RiMiTivE  Music 


WALLASCHBK 


w 


^i> 


v'c  •»«* 


\i' 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLES  LEY  COLLEGE 


PURCHASED  FROM 
LIBRARY  FUNDS 


162742 


«ll.V>t V  '  ■•  iff  *«*.■■.  »• ' .  •  ^ 


i^ 


i^'S-,'  v' 


'j>%- 


i^'TA    /^ 


et'xnyf^A 


/ 


^lT3>^ 


PRIMITIVE     MUSIC 


ABERDEEN    UNIVERSITY    PRESS 


Primitive  Music 


AN    INQUIRY    INTO    THE    ORIGIN    AND    DEVELOPMENT    OF 

MUSIC,     SONGS,    INSTRUMENTS,    DANCES,    AND 

PANTOMIMES    OF    SAVAGE    RACES 


BY 

RICHARD     WALLASCHEK 


WITH  MUSICAL   EXAMPLES 


LONDON 
LONGMANS,    GREEN,    AND    CO. 

AND  NEW  YORK:  15  EAST  i6th  STREET 

1893 

\_All  rights  r-eserved\ 


iLz  7'V: 


35-^7 


PREFACE. 

It  was  a  suggestion  of  my  friend  Dr.  Edward  Wester- 
marck  that  my  original  essays  on  primitive  music  should 
be  revised  and  amplified  so  as  to  form  a  fairly  serviceable 
treatise  on  the  subject.  While  engaged  in  this  work  I 
have  met  with  so  much  assistance  and  encouragement 
that  I  can  only  quite  inadequately  acknowledge  my  deep 
gratitude  to  Mrs.  Plimmer,  Prof,  and  Mrs.  Sully  for  all 
the  help  and  advice  (scientific  and  other)  they  have  given 
me  from  the  beginning  of  my  labours.  I  have  also  to 
express  my  thanks  to  Mr.  R.  H.  Legge  for  his  aid  in 
preparing  this  English  version  of  the  work  for  the  press, 
to  Prof.  Rhys  Davids  and  Mr.  James  Sime  for  giving  me 
the  benefit  of  their  knowledge  and  experience,  and  to  Dr. 
H.  R.  Mill  for  his  kind  revision  of  the  proof-sheets  and  for 
his  most  valuable  suggestions  in  so  many  geographical 
and  ethnological  details. 

As  to  the  importance  of  ethnology  for  the  science  of 
art  I  need  hardly  say  many  words,  it  being  a  generally 
accepted  fact.  In  the  present  work  it  has  been  m}-  aim 
to  deal  with  the  music  of  savage  races  only,  while  the 
music  of  ancient  civilisation  has  merely  been  glanced  at 
whenever  it  was  necessary  to  indicate  the  connecting 
links  between  the  most  primitive  and  the  comparatively 
advanced  culture. 


VI  PREFACE. 

With  regard  to  technical  particulars  I  may  mention 
that  on  Dr.  Mill's  advice  the  names  of  savage  tribes  are 
spelt  according  to  the  new  system  proposed  in  1891  by 
the  London  Geographical  Society.  The  mode  of  quoting 
adopted  in  this  book  is  that  I  refer  with  /.  c.  to  the  book 
mentioned  in  the  list  of  authorities  at  the  end  of  this  work. 

RICHARD  WALLASCHEK. 


London,  April,  1893. 


LIST  OF  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  I. 
General  Character  of  the  Music  of  Primitive  People. 

1.  Africa — 

Bushmen  i,  Hottentots  3,  Kafirs  4,  Bechuana,  Damara  5,  Makololo 
6,  Ingese,  Bongo  7,  Abongo,  Makalaka  8,  Inenga,  Karagwe, 
Wanyoii  9,  East  Africa  10,  Ashantis,  Dahomey  11,  Abyssinia, 
Morocco  13,  Ethiopians  14,  Madagascar  14. 

2.  Asia — 

China  15,  Japan  17,  India  18,  Nilgiri  Hills,  Todas  19,  Siam  20, 
Sinhalese  20,  Burma,  Ostiaks,  Samoyeds  22,  Mongols,  Tartars 

23- 

3.  The  Islands  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Pacific  Ocean — 

Andaman  Islands,  Java  24,  Dyaks  25,  Celebes,  Salayer  26,  Philip- 
pines, Molucca  group  27,  New  Guinea  28,  New  Britain,  Fiji 
29,  Tonga  (Friendly)  Islands  31,  Samoa  33,  Pitcairn  34, 
Mendana  Archip.,  Sandwich  Islands  36. 

4.  Australia,  Tasmania,  and  New  Zealand — 

Songs  and  dances  37,  different  kinds  of  songs  38,  musical  talent 
39,  Tasmanians  40,  Maoris  41,  modern  annotation  of  primi- 
tive music  42,  Maori  fairies  43. 

5.  Antcrica — 

Indians,  Port  des  Franfais  45,  Nootka  Sound,  Apaches,  Hyper- 
boreans 46,  Alaska,  California  47,  Mexico  48,  Yaquis  50, 
Yukas,  Iroquois  51,  Peru,  Bolivia,  Incas  52,  Chile  (Arau- 
canians),  Abipones  (Paraguay)  53,  Patagonia,  Charruas  (Ura- 
guay),  Guarani,  Brazil  55,  Coroados,  Yurunas  56,  Tierra  del 
Fuego  57,  Eskimos  58,  Negroes  60. 

6.  Europe — 

Jews,  Gipsies  62,  Gipsies  and  Hungarians  63,  Fetis  on  classification 
of  human  races  according  to  musical  systems  64. 


vill  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  II. 

Singers  and  Composers  in  Primitive  Times. 

Profession  of  singers  66,  the  manner  of  singing  69,  women's  singing 
(women  composers  and  poets)  70,  women  playing  instruments 
73,  children's  singing,  men's  singing,  tenor  voices  75,  the 
human  voice  in  primitive  times  76. 

CHAPTER  III. 

Instruments. 
(I.   General  Rc'inarks — 

Prehistoric  discoveries  80,  material  of  primitive  instruments  83,  the 
most  primitive  instruments  84,  tribes  without  instruments  87, 
substitutes  of  instruments,  appreciation  of  European  instru- 
ments 88. 

b.  Fhitcs,  Fifes,  Flageolets— 

Humboldt  on  the  "three  different  uses  of  reeds  "  go,  simplicity  of 
the  flute  91,  nose  flutes,  occurrence  of  the  flute  92,  regular 
airs  on  flutes  95,  pan-pipe,  double  flutes  96,  bagpipe  97. 

c.  Tniinpets,  Tubes,  Honis — 

Shape  and  occurrence  99. 

d.  Castanets  102. 

c.  Rattle  103,  use  of  instruments  connected  with  practical  purpose  104. 
/.   Tant-tani  and  Gong — 

Chinese,  Javese,  and  Malayan,  various  shapes  105,  eftect  of  tam- 
tam 106. 

g.  Bells  — 

Origin  and  purpose,  attribute  of  priests  107. 
Ii.  Musical  Boxes  108. 
/.  Di'iiin,  Kcttle-drnni,  Tambourine — 

Drumming  without  drums  108,  peculiar  shapes  no,  use  of  drum 
III,  drum  language  112,  various  styles  of  drumming  113, 
tuning  of  drums  114,  drum  ensembles  115,  kettle-drum,  tam- 
bourine 116. 

k.  Marimba — 

Description  and  occurrence  116,  varieties  117,  marimba  ensembles 
118. 
/.  Goura  118. 


CONTENTS. 

ni.  yfia's  harp  120. 

n.  Guitar,  Zither,  Harp,  Mandoline,  Lute,  Banjo,  Lyra — 

Guitars  121,  zither  122,  named  after  birds,  harp  123,  mandoline, 
lutes,  banjo,  lyre  125. 

0.  Violin— 

Producing  tones  by  stroking  or  rubbing  126,  different  kinds  of 
violins  127,  theories  on  the  origin  of  violins  129. 

/.   Orchestra — 

Quartettes  and  bands  among  savages  131,  conductors  135. 
q.  Instruiuents  of  the  most  Ancient  Periods  of  Culture  136. 

CHAPTER   IV. 

The  Basis  of  our  Musical  System. 

1.  Harmony — 

Savages  singing  in  harmony  139,  tonality  143,  purely  melodious 
song  not  necessarily  preceding  harmonious  songs  144. 

2.  Major  and  Minor  Ke\ — 

Songs  in  minor  145,  no  internal  connection  between  major  and 
minor  and  feelings  of  pain  and  pleasure  146,  minor  chords  148, 
theories  on  the  minor  key  148,  the  neuter  third  150. 

3.  The  Scale— 

Most  ancient  succession  of  tones  151,  relation  of  pentatonic  and 
diatonic  scales  153,  scale  founded  on  natural  laws  155,  on 
human  voice  156,  on  instruments  157,  beginning  the  scale 
from  above  158. 

4.  Music  Notes  and  Rhythmic  Division — 

Duple,  triple,  and  mixed  time  159,  music  notes  160. 

CHAPTER  V. 

Physical  and  Psychical  Influence  of  Music. 

Examples  of  emotional  influence  of  music  163-166,  music  and 
medicine  166. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Text  and  Music. 

Meaningless  words  170,  the  composer's  liberty  in  treating  the  words 
of  his  songs  174,  frequent  repetitions  175,  more  advanced  sub- 
h 


CONTENTS. 

jects  177,  recitative  180,  impossibility  of  recitative  181.  transi- 
tion of  speech  to  song  183,  accent,  as  changing  the  meaning  of 
words  185. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Dance  and  Music. 

Union  of  dance  and  music  187,  description  of  various  savage 
dances,  Africa  188,  Australia  igo,  South  Sea  Islands  191,  Asia, 
North  America  193,  Central  and  South  America  194,  tribes 
without  dances  196,  the  king  as  dancer  and  musical  conductor, 
religious  dances  197,  funeral  dances  igS,  indecent  dances 
199,  Hindu  and  Mohammedan  view  of  dancing  202,  decent 
dances  203,  dances  for  women  only  204,  women's  share  in 
dance  and  music  208,  dances  for  men  only  209,  dances  for  both 
sexes,  but  apart  from  each  other  210,  dances  for  both  sexes 
together  213. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Primitive  Drama  and  Pantomime. 

Primitive  dances  in  form  of  a  pantomime  214,  Wagner's  theory  215, 
examples  of  primitive  representations  216,  more  advanced 
forms,  Corrobberree  221,  the  Kuri  dance  223,  the  Hurra,  the 
Javese  shadow-play  224,  performances  before  an  audience  of 
savages  and  civilised  nations  227,  the  desire  for  witnessing 
tragical  events  228. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Origin  of  Music 

The  importance  of  rhythm  in  primitive  music  230,  as  originating 
from  the  general  desire  of  exercise  231,  "  Spieltrieb  "  232,  the 
rhythmical  element  as  intellectual  in  music  235,  "music"  in  the 
animal  kingdom  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  species  237, 
animal  dances  241,  reasons  against  Darwin's  theory  on  music, 
(i)  psychological  242,  (2)  biological  246,  (3)  physiological  248, 
the  old  theory  on  birds'  song  248,  Weismann  on  music  249, 
the  speech  theory  (Herbert  Spencer)  250,  reasons  against  it 
251,  primitive  and  ancient  tales  and  legends  on  the  origin  of 
music  259. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Heredity  and  Development. 

Weismann  on  non-heredity  of  acquired  characters  263,  Galton  264, 
families  of  musicians  265,  natural  gift  and  external  influences 


CONTENTS.  xi 

upon  the  composer's  mind  266,  tradition  and  imitation  in  music 
(principle  of  objective  heredity)  269,  transmission  of  instincts  269, 
Spencer's  theory  of  the  "  surplus  of  vigour  "  271,  inapplicability 
of  energy  272,  the  dance  before  and  after  battle  and  hunt  273, 
plays  and  pantomimes  as  preparation  for  common  action  274, 
music  as  organising  power  in  the  people's  play  to  facilitate  the 
simultaneousness  of  action  275,  music  within  the  scope  of 
natural  selection  277,  Darwin,  Wallace,  L.  Morgan  on  spiritual 
life  of  men  and  animals  279,  stability  of  musical  talent  among 
savages  and  civilised  nations  281,  drawing  influenced  by 
natural  selection  281,  stability  of  talent  for  drawing  282,  there 
is  no  distinct  musical  faculty  283,  mental  strength  in  general 
assuming  that  peculiar  shape  (artistic,  scientific,  etc.)  which  is 
most  appropriate  to  circumstances  284,  the  future  of  music 
286,  theoretical  explanation  impossible  286,  no  reason  for  the 
discontinuance  of  artistic  development  287,  retrospective  view 
from  the  most  primitive  times  up  to  Wagner  288. 

Summary,        ---.--..._.   291 

List  of  quoted  Authorities,       ----.--.   297 
Index,      ..----..._..  323, 

Musical  Examples. 


CHAPTER  I. 

GENERAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  MUSIC  OF   PRIMriTVE 
PEOPLE. 


might  descend  in  the  order  of  primitive  people,  we  should 
probably  find  no  race  which  did  not  exhibit  at  least  some 
trace  of  musical  aptitude,  and  sufficient  understanding  to 
turn  it  to  account.  In  fact  it  would  appear  that  among 
races  of  the  very  lowest  order  of  civilisation  there  are 
frequently  to  be  found  some  which  have  more  musical 
capacity  than  many  of  a  higher  order.  This  is  un- 
doubtedly the  case  with  the  Bushmen. 

The  Bushman  sings  while  he  dances,  swaying  his 
body  about  in  strict  time  with  the  music ;  nor  does  he 
cease  until,  tired  out,  he  sinks  to  the  ground  and  once 
more  takes  breath.  Then  he  sings  again,  still  keeping 
time  to  the  music,  and,  raising  himself  quickly,  begins  to 
dance  with  renewed  vigour.  When  dancing  in  his  hut 
he  leans  upon  two  sticks,  the  lowness  of  the  roof  not 
admitting  of  his  standing  upright,  while  the  hut  itself 
is  so  small  that  it  is  only  in  the  middle  of  a  narrow  circle 
that  there  is  sufficient  room  for  even  a  single  dancer.^ 
Notwithstanding  this  apparently  tiring  amusement,  the 
Bushman  takes  manifest  delight  in  the  dance,  and  the 
more  weary  he  becomes  the  happier  he  is.- 

1  Burchell,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  63. 

-  Wood,  Nat.  Hist,  of  Man,  i.  p.  292. 

I 


2  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

It  may  well  be  imagined  what  the  atmosphere  of  the 
hut  is,  and  what  the  effect  of  a  Bushman  dance.  It  is 
indeed  similar  to  that  of  a  Turkish  bath,  and  travellers 
state  that  an  European  could  scarcely  exist  in  it.  This 
may  be,  but,  at  the  same  time,  I  am  of  opinion  that  it 
would  not  fare  better  with  a  Bushman  were  he  to  enter 
a  ball-room  in  a  small  country  village  of  Germany.  He 
would  find  that  the  bodily  exertion  is  not  less  severe  than 
that  of  the  savages,  while  the  fumes  of  gas,  tobacco,  food 
and  drink  are  not  much  of  an  improvement  upon  those 
of  a  Bushman's  hut. 

Burchell  gives  two  examples  of  dance  melodies^  [Mus. 
Ex.  20],  and  he  is  quite  correct  in  asserting  that  they 
contain  very  strange  combinations  of  sound.  Other  tra- 
vellers, too,  who  have  heard  them  have  spoken  of  them 
in  terms  of  high  praise,  Burchell  even  going  so  far  as  to 
declare  that  mere  words  were  insufficient  to  describe  their 
beauties.  "They  must  be  heard;  they  must  be  partici- 
pated in."  From  these  dances  he  derived  as  much  pleasure 
as  did  the  natives,  so  quiet  and  orderly  were  they.  No  rude 
laughter,  no  noisy  shouting,  no  coarse,  drunken,  ribald 
wit  was  there  ;  throughout  it  was  a  modest,  sociable 
amusement.  For  this  reason  Burchell  wished  that  these 
poor  creatures  might  be  more  justly  judged  than  is 
usually  their  lot,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  had  he  not  had 
further  experience  of  them,  he  would  not  have  hesitated 
to  declare  the  Bushmen  the  happiest  of  mortals.  "  Music 
softened  all  their  passions,  and  thus  they  lulled  them- 
selves into  that  mild  and  tranquil  state  in  which  no  evil 
thoughts  approach  the  mind.  The  soft  and  delicate 
voices  of  the  girls,  instinctively  accordant  to  those  of  the 
women  and  the  men,  the  gentle  clapping  of  the  hands, 
the  rattles  of  the  dancers,  and  the  mellow  sound  of  the 
water-drum,  all  harmoniously  attuned  and  keeping  time 

^  L.  c,  pp.  66-87. 


together,  the  peaceful  happy  countenances  of  the  party, 
and  the  cheerful  light  of  the  fire — were  circumstances 
so  combined  and  fitted  to  produce  the  most  soothing 
effects  on  the  senses,  that  I  sat  as  if  the  hut  had  been 
my  home,  and  felt  as  though  I  had  been  one  of  them."^ 

Whether  this  effect  is  to  be  entirely  attributed  to  the 
music  or  not  is  an  open  question.  I  think  that  in  all 
probability  it  was  partly  due  to  the  romantic  scenery,  to 
the  unusual  appearance  of  the  natives,  to  the  unvarying 
monotony  of  the  three  constantly  repeated  bars  of  melody. 
Whatever  may  be  the  capabilities  of  their  music,  the 
Bushmen  understand  to  some  extent  how  "  tune  "  is 
made,  and  undoubtedly  this  is  an  artistic  beginning. 

The  Hottentots  are  great  whistlers,  and  for  this 
purpose  they  draw  their  lips  to  one  side  and  whistle 
between  their  teeth.-  Burchell  asserts  that  dance  music 
is  the  most  congenial  to  the  Hottentots,  "at  least  among 
all  the  musicians  who  were  at  different  times  in  his 
service,  none  ever  played  any  other  kind,  nor  did  Burchell 
ever  hear  a  Hottentot  performing  a  slow  air,  or  singing 
to  his  own  performance"'.'^  Many  of  the  natives  cannot 
discriminate  between  a  regular  tune  and  a  mere  noise,  and 
Burchell's  flute  had  no  effect  whatever  upon  them. 

On  his  journey  to  Kafirland,  Burchell,  at  Litakun, 
met  with  tribes  which  found  a  great  source  of  delight  in 
European  music.  In  the  evening  a  whole  army  of  boys 
would  come  to  his  hut  and  listen  with  manifest  pleasure 
to  the  tones  of  his  violin,  and  would  repeat  the  melodies 
he  played  with  surprising  accuracy.*  The  neighbouring 
Kafir  races,  however,  do  not  appear  to  share  this  gift ; 
Ihey  have,  in  fact,  a  very  singular  conception  of  music. 
^'  Their  notion  of  melody  is  but  very  slight,  while  their 
timing  is  perfection  itself,  and  the  very  fact  that  several 
hundred  men  will  sing  the  various  war-songs  as  if  they 

1  L.  c,  ii.  p.  66.  -  Thunberg,  /.  c,  p.  37. 

^  Burchell,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  396.  ^  Ibid.,  I.  c,  ii.  p.  438. 


4  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

were  animated  with  a  single  spirit  shows  that  they  must 
all  keep  the  most  exact  time."  ^  During  the  song  they 
remain  seated,  making  very  violent  movements  the  while, 
and  by  striking  their  elbows  against  their  ribs  with  all 
their  power  drive  out  the  air  from  their  lungs.  Shooter 
gives  a  few  musical  examples.-  [Mus.  Ex.  i.]  The 
natives  sing  in  a  kind  of  falsetto,  suddenly  dropping 
into  a  gruff  bass,  and  they  seem  to  think  that  a  song  is 
no  song  unless  it  be  sung  with  the  whole  power  of  the 
lungs.  The  same  is  the  case,  I  am  afraid,  in  much  more 
cultured  countries.  Of  harmony  there  is  absolutely  no 
trace  ;   they  care  only  for  unison  singing. 

Stevens  heard  a  round  sung  by  the  Batlapi  Kafirs 
in  which  the  moon  was  compared  to  a  heartless,  loveless 
hound  which  wandered  alone,  cold  and  insensible,  through 
the  sky.  The  Batlapi  reminded  Weber  of  \'enetian 
Gondoliers,  or  of  the  Lazzaroni  in  Naples.  One  would 
improvise  a  stanza  which  others  would  immediately  sing 
in  chorus  to  a  charming  melody.  Each  in  turn  impro- 
vises thus  so  that  all  have  an  opportunity  of  exhibiting 
their  talents  for  poetry  and  wit.  The  fact  that  all  words 
ended  in  a  vowel-sound  simplified  the  extemporisation  of 
verses  which  were  not  invariably  accurate  as  regards 
rhythm.  The  general  singing  of  these  stanzas  seemed  to 
afford  the  greatest  amusement  to  the  singers  as  they  sat 
in  a  circle  round  the  camp  fire.  Weber  adds  that  the 
Hottentots  and  Bushmen  have  no  songs  at  all,  and  the 
Eastern  Kafirs  only  their  ear-splitting  war-songs.^  The 
Kafirs  who  travelled  with  Weber  were  not  in  the  least 
impressed  with  the  Prayer  from  "  Norma,"  or  with  that 
from  "  Les  Huguenots,"  but  the  Radetzki  march  and  a 
Spanish  song  attracted  them.  One  Bechuana  man  had 
constructed  an  instrument  for  himself  after  the  manner 
of    a    European    piano,    by  stretching    steel   wires   over 

1  Wood,  Nat.  Hist,  of  Man,  i.  p.  229.  -  Shooter,  /.  c,  p.  237. 

^  Weber,  /.  c,  i.  p.  221. 


AFRICA.  5 

hollow  water-melons  ;  these  wires  were  played  by  means 
of  small  reed  hammers.^ 

The  reports  concerning  Bechuana  music  are  for  the 
most  part  unfavourable.  In  Shoshong  (the  residence  of 
the  Bechuana  chief  Matcheen),  a  village  of  some  30,000 
inhabitants,  the  traveller  Mohr  seems  to  have  had  few 
opportunities  of  hearing  interesting  music.  The  noise  of 
drums,  dancing  and  howling  was  kept  up  uninterruptedly 
day  and  night;  "it  was  just  the  time  when  the  }-oung 
women  who  had  reached  maturity  had  to  undergo  singular 
treatment  and  ceremonies".  Numbers  of  these  dusky 
damsels  are  as  it  were  chaperoned  by  old  women,  who, 
armed  with  branches  of  a  prickly  thorn,  pounce  upon 
every  man  who  attempts  anything  against  the  girls. 
The  latter  are  tormented  by  excessive  watching,  and  are 
inured  to  hard  work  in  order  that  they  may  be  prepared 
for  the  duties  of  a  housewife.- 

Music  is  not  very  much  better  with  the  Damaras.  Their 
highest  idea  of  a  musical  performance  merely  consists 
in  the  imitation  of  the  galloping  or  trotting  of  various 
animals.^  Thus  it  appears  that  rhythmical  movements 
are  considered  the  main  point.  The  Damaras  are  great 
lovers  of  animals,  notably  of  oxen  and  sheep,  of  which 
they  possess  enormous  herds ;  but  so  slight  is  their 
intelligence  that  they  are  utterly  unable  to  count  their 
number.  Nevertheless,  they  never  lose  an  animal  :  they 
recognise  the  face  of  every  head  of  cattle  which  they  have 
once  seen  !  These  things  considered  it  can  readily  be 
understood  that  cattle  form  the  chief  subjects  of  their 
poetry.  The  Damaras  rarely  dance ;  in  fact,  only  on 
extraordinary  occasions ;  and  they  sing  just  as  rarely 
together,^  although  fond  of  solo-singing,  the  words  for 
which  they  extemporise  while  the  refrains  are  taken  up 
by  a  chorus.     Their  dances  are  for  the  most  part  war- 

1  Weber,  /.  c,  i.  p.  140.  -  Mohr,  /.  c,  i.  p.  i6o. 

^  Galton,  Travels,  etc.,  p.  117.  ■*  Ibid. 


b  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

dances,  but  occasionally  they  give  expression  to  ordinary 
feelings  by  dancing.  So  says  Galton,  at  any  rate,  when 
speaking  of  a  dance  which  they  performed  after  having 
slain  two  men  whom  they  had  falsely  accused  of  cattle- 
stealing.^  Possibly  the  occurrence  of  a  robber}'  gave  rise 
to  such  excitement  in  the  tribe  as  could  only  be  quieted 
down  by  an  abnormal  effort. 

But  the  Damaras  are  not  the  only  tribe  in  whose 
art-system  cattle  play  the  most  important  part.  The 
Makololo  dance  and  sing  with  even  greater  tumultuous 
excitement  and  consequent  fatigue.  Livingstone,  who 
once  witnessed  such  a  dance,  wondered  how  such  exer- 
tions could  give  pleasure.  "  It  is  very  hard  work,"  replied 
the  dancer,  "  but  it  is  very  nice,  and  Sekeletu  (their 
chief)  will  give  us  an  ox  for  dancing  for  him."-  This 
reply  may  surprise  us,  yet  how  often  ma}-  one  see  in 
European  concert-rooms  an  artist  worn  out  by  exer- 
tions which  have  only  demonstrated  the  strength  and 
endurance  that  have  enabled  him  to  overcome  every 
technical  difficulty  and  nothing  more.  He  deems  the 
playing  with  all  the  strength  of  his  arm  to  be  the  only 
right  method,  and  when  at  length  he  quits  the  hall,  weary 
and  dishevelled,  he,  too,  seems  to  say:  "It's  hard  work, 
but  Sekeletu  will  give  me  an  ox  for  playing  for  him  ". 
Undoubtedly  in  this  naive  expression  of  the  savages  we 
can  see  a  good  thing — our  own,  hitherto  veiled  Psycho- 
logy. Is  it  indeed  remarkable  that  the  Kafir  in  his  poetry 
only  recognises  a  threefold  subject :  war,  cattle  and  exces- 
sive adulation  of  his  ruler  ?  '^  The  hymns  to  the  chief 
are  for  the  most  part  written  b}'  himself!  How  comic 
this  seems  to  us,  and  yet  every  day  just  such  things  occur 
in  civilised  countries,  the  only  difference  being  that  in  the 
latter,  people  are  more  ceremonious.  However  this  may 
be,  the  fact  which  we  must   not  lose  sight  of  now  is  that 

^  Gallon,  Travels,  etc.,  p.  55.  -  Livingstone,  /.  c,  p.  225. 

■'  Waitz,  ii.  p.  387. 


the  subject  of  primitive  Art  is  very  simple,  and  has  Httle 
bearing  upon  the  higher  emotion  of  Love. 

Proceeding  from  Kafir-  and  Damara-land  into  the 
heart  of  /Africa  we  come  to  the  Congo  people.  The 
tribes  of  the  Lower  Congo  are  usually  described  as 
indolent.^  Who  knows  if  this  be  correct  ?  To  judge 
from  Tuckey's  account  they  are  dreamers  rather.  Of 
the  men  of  Inga  it  is  said  that  they  devote  themselves 
to  a  kind  of  art-decoration.  If  one  of  them  receive  a 
few  vari-coloured  beads,  he  relinquishes  his  work  in  the 
fields  to  his  wife,  while  he  remains  at  home  stringing  the 
beads  together  in  all  manner  of  combinations  until  he 
discover  an  arrangement  which  pleases  his  fancy.  In  spite 
of  this  "  indolence  "  the  Ingese,  like  all  the  people  of  the 
Congo,  take  great  delight  in  a  species  of  dancing,  which 
consists  of  different  gesticulations  and  movements  of  the 
arms  not  always  the  most  artistic.  Their  song,  of  which 
they  are  particularly  fond,  is  merely  a  monotonous  howl, 
not  exactly  adapted  to  gratify  the  ear.- 

A  similar  report  is  given  by  Schweinfurth  of  the  Bongo 
tribes.  Their  orgies  always  impressed  him  with  the  idea 
that  the  natives  were  merely  attempting  to  surpass  in 
violence  the  fury  of  the  elements  !  ^  It  is  strange  that  he 
likens  their  music  to  a  bubbling  recitative  in  which  the 
words,  as  it  were,  stumble  upon  each  other.  "  At  one 
time  it  suggests  the  yelping  of  dogs,  at  another  the  lowing 
of  a  cow."  This  may  be,  but  as  a  rule  such  is  not  the 
character  of  our  recitative.  He  may  be  correct,  however, 
in  associating  music  with  our  imitative  instincts.  It  is 
but  a  question  of  what  is  imitated,  and  this  is  clear  enough 
in  the  case  of  primitive  music. 

There  still  remains  a  long  list  of  minor  races  all  of 
whom  in  their  different  ways  have  a  characteristic  con- 
ception   of   music.      In   Guinea    all   music  is   at   an   end 

1  Tuckey,  /.  c,  p.  198.  -  Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  373. 

^  Schweinfurth,  /.  c,  i.  p.  130. 


8  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

during  periods  of  mourning.^  In  the  kingdom  of  Benin, 
on  the  other  hand,  such  occasions  are  made  use  of  for  the 
expression  of  lamentations  and  funeral  songs,  which  are 
at  the  same  time  accompanied  by  the  music  of  their 
instruments.  These  instruments  cease  at  stated  intervals 
of  time,  during  which  the  entire  assembly  gives  itself  up 
to  drink.-  These  Benin-negroes  are  an  original  people  ; 
they  play  willingly  enough,  but  never  for  money,  only  for 
beans.-^ 

The  Abongo  people,  a  race  of  dwarfs  in  West  Africa, 
have  no  musical  instruments,  and  content  themselves  by 
striking  two  pieces  of  wood  together  while  they  improvise 
songs  which  consist  of  nothing  but  lengthy  repetitions  of 
words  describing  certain  circumstances,  as  "The  white 
man  is  a  good  man  and  gives  the  Abongo  salt,"  etc. 
Notwithstanding  this  fondness  of  the  negroes  for  singing, 
Lenz  never  found  a  single  song  amongst  any  of  the  tribes 
he  visited  which  had  been  handed  down  from  generation 
to  generation  ;  everywhere  they  were  merely  a  verse  or 
two  improvised  to  describe  some  passing  event. ^ 

Mungo  Park  gives  a  description  of  a  strange  custom 
which  was  introduced  with  song  and  dance.  If  a  Kafir  or 
negro  is  unable  to  keep  his  wives  in  order,  a  festival  is 
held  to  settle  the  quarrel,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  are  invited  to  take  part.  At  midnight  there  is  a 
sudden  stillness  during  which  Mumbo  Jumbo  appears 
bearing  a  club  as  his  insignia  of  office,  seizes  the  quarrel- 
some wife,  who  is  naked,  binds  her  to  a  stake,  and  amid 
the  shouts  of  laughter  of  the  audience,  gives  her  a  sound 
drubbing.^ 

Mbira-music  of  the  Makalaka,  which  is  by  no  means 
unpleasant  to  listen  to,  usually  consists  of  a   phrase  of 

1  Astlcy  Collect.,  iii.  p.  22.  -  Ibid.,  p.  gjc. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  96.  ■*  Lenz,  /.  c,  p.  iii. 

■'  Schauenburg,  I.  c,  p.  92;  ill.  Wood,  i.  675. 


eight  bars  repeated  ad  infinituui ;  to  it  are  sung  impro- 
vised verses  with  a  refrain.^ 

The  Inenga  are  given  up  to  drink :  they  especially  like 
rum,  the  arrival  of  which  in  a  village  is  always  a  cause  of 
festivity,  of  obscene  dances  and  of  much  brawling.  I 
cannot  let  this  pass  without  stating  that  this  particular 
form  of  entertainment  has  probably  the  influence  of  civili- 
sation to  thank  for  its  origin.- 

The  Hottentot  Korana  appear  to  be  very  gifted  ;  they 
are  described  as  "docile,  good-tempered,  and  were  not  only 
willing  but  impatiently  desirous  of  gaining  knowledge  of 
a  missionary  who  visited  them ;  they  invariably  asked 
that  he  would  teach  them  the  alphabet  with  music,  and 
many  a  night's  rest  was  interrupted  by  their  inordinate 
desire  for  instruction  ".-^ 

The  Karagwe  tribes  have  small,  plaintive  songs  which 
were  easily  remembered  and  repeated,  "  they  were  so 
sweet  and  pleasing  to  the  ear".*  Among  the  Mittu  tribes 
music  is  held  in  high  esteem  :  they  appreciate  a  genuine 
melody  better  than  any  other  African  tribe,  while  the 
majority  of  negroes — as  Schweinfurth  asserts  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  statements  of  other  travellers — only  recognise 
alliterations  and  recitatives.  He  once  heard  a  chorus 
sung  by  a  hundred  Mittus,  male  and  female,  old  and 
young,  who  kept  admirable  time,  and  succeeded  by  a 
gradual  cadence  in  producing  some  very  effective  variations 
of  a  well-sustained  air.° 

Much  less  poetical  apparently  are  the  Wanyori  in  so 
far  as  we  can  determine  from  the  utterances  of  their  king. 
His  ideal  is  the  musical-box.  "  One  does  not  require  to 
study  it,  and  it  can  be  set  going  at  night  to  play  you  to 
sleep  when  you  are  too  drunk  to  play  it  yourself."*^ 

Who,  however,  would  think  of  making  a  tribe  answer- 

1  Mauch,  /.  c,  p.  43.  -  Lenz,  /.  c,  p.  57. 

'  Wood,  /.  c,  p.  303.  ■*  Grant,  /.  c,  p.  182. 

■'■  Schweinfurth,  /.  c,  p.  198.  •*  Baker,  S.  W.,  Ismailia,  p.  355. 


lO  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

able  for  the  statements  of  a  not  very  gifted  king  ? 
Elson  though  says  of  the  people  themselves  that  a 
London  organ-grinder  could  march  through  Central  Africa 
always  accompanied  by  a  horde  of  enthusiastic  and 
admiring  followers.^  It  is  said,  too,  that  a  musical-box 
created  a  great  sensation  among  the  Aduma  (West  Africa), 
and  that  hundreds  of  curious  negroes  listened  devoutly 
to  the  strains  of  "  Czar  und  Zimmermann,"  and  the 
"  Marseillaise  ".  Lenz  frequently  made  use  of  the 
wonderful  effect  of  the  instrument  when  he  wished  to 
accomplish  some  hazardous  enterprise.^  Renoki,  King  of 
the  Inenga  (West  Africa),  derived  great  pleasure  from  a 
beautiful  musical-box,  and  was  never  tired  of  listening  to 
the  melodies  of  "  Madame  Angot  ".^  But  from  the  descrip- 
tions I  am  of  opinion  that  it  was  not  only  the  music 
but  the  works  of  the  instrument  which  drew  forth  so 
much  admiration  ;  the  wheels  and  cylinders  astonished 
him  greatly,  and  the  majority  of  savages  wished  to  see 
the  box. 

Many  tribes  use  their  musical  ear  for  other  than 
artistic  purposes.  The  Marnns  (Sierra  Leone),  for 
example,  have  intercourse  with  each  other  at  great 
distances  with  the  help  of  a  horn,  and  they  can  recognise 
the  note  when  ordinary  individuals  can  scarcely  hear  the 
sound.  On  this  horn  they  have  a  fixed  "  call  "  (a  species 
of  Leitmotiv)  for  each  one,  so  that  they  are  enabled  to 
summon  whom  they  please.*  For  this  it  is  obviously 
necessary  to  have  a  definite  sense  of  melody. 

Now,  however,  if  we  turn  to  a  group  concentrated  in 
East  Africa  we  find  comparatively  favourable  reports. 
Stanley,  at  any  rate,  speaks  in  terms  of  high  praise  of 
East  African  music.  In  mentioning  the  phalanx  dance 
of  Mazamboni's  warriors,  he  says  :  "  There  are  solos  and 
duets,    but   there   must   always  be   a  chorus,  the  grander 

1  Elson,  /.  c,  p.  274.  -  Lenz,  /.  c,  pp.  286-7. 

3  Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  62.  •»  Dallas,  /.  c,  i.  p.  89. 


AFRICA.  II 

the  better,  and  when  the  men,  women  and  children  hft 
their  voices  high  above  the  drums  and  the  chatter  and 
murmur  of  the  crowd,  I  must  confess  to  having  enjoyed 
it  immensely,  especially  when  the  Wanyamwezi  are  the 
performers,  who  are  by  far  the  best  singers  on  the  African 
continent.  The  Zanzibaris,  Zulus,  Waian,  Wasegara, 
Waseguhha  and  Wagindo  are  in  the  main  very  much 
alike  in  method  and  execution,  though  they  have  each 
minor  dances  and  songs,  which  vary  considerably,  but 
thev  are  either  dreadfully  melancholic  or  stupidly  bar- 
barous."'^ Stanley  believes  that  only  Wanyamwezi  music 
would  gratify  an  English  audience.  For  this  reason 
possibly  Burton's  verdict  was  so  unfavourable,  for  he 
wrote  that  music  in  East  Africa  was  at  a  very  low  ebb. 
It  is  nevertheless  marvellous  how  the  East  Africans  keep 
time,  although  they  are  no  melodists,  while  their  instru- 
ments are  imported  from  Madagascar  and  the  coast. ^  They 
delight  in  singing,  yet  they  have  no  metrical  songs  and 
their  recitati\-e  usuall}- ends  with  "Ah,  ha  ".^  A  simple 
and  largely-used  musical  exercise  is  that  which  Behr 
describes:  "One  musical  negro  takes  a  drum,  strikes  it, 
and  is  accompanied  by  the  lookers-on  with  singing  and 
time-beating.  Dancers  surround  the  drummer,  and  move 
backwards  and  forwards  according  to  the  rhythm  of  the 
songs."'*  More  striking  is  the  cultivation  of  the  rhythmic 
sense  described  by  Grant,  whose  people  when  cleaning 
rice  were  always  supported  by  singers  who  accompanied 
the  workers  with  hand-clapping  and  foot-stamping.  This 
was  kept  up  until  the  rice  was  almost  ground  to  pow'der.^ 
If  we  now  once  more  go  to  the  West  and  examine 
the  music  of  tribes  which  have  been  in  contact  with 
Europeans  for  years  we  find  among  the  Ashantis  music 
in  a  high  state  of  cultivation.     Both  here  and  in  Dahomey 

'  In  Darkest  Africa,  i.  p.  412.  -  Burton,  Lake  Reg.,  ii.  p.  291. 

='  Ibid.,  p.  338.  -*  Behr,  /.  c,  p.  243. 

•5  Grant,  /.  c,  p.  62. 


12  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

there  is  harmony  in  the  music,  which  by  some  is  con- 
sidered the  best  in  Africa/  although  so  deHcate  a  question 
as  this  can  only  be  decided  by  one  who  has  had  experience 
of  the  harmony  of  all  African  tribes,  which  is  the  case 
with  no  scientific  writer.  A  few  of  the  Ashanti  songs 
are  in  the  form  of  dialogues  and  the  roles  are  sung  by 
both  sexes,  w^ho  step  out  in  turn  from  the  ranks  of  the 
performers  as  they  stand  opposite  to  each  other  with  their 
Sankiis  and  other  instruments.-  In  Dahomey  the  king 
himself  dances  and  sings  during  the  festivals  which  precede 
human  sacrifices  and  which  are  of  common  occurrence 
there.  His  song  is  answered  by  a  chorus  which  sounds 
like  laughter,  but  is  in  reality  a  song  of  mourning  while 
a  melancholy  accompaniment  is  made  by  means  of  a 
cymbal.  Then  the  king  raises  himself,  holding  his  sceptre 
on  high,  and  prays  to  his  father's  spirit.^  Quite  opposed 
to  the  praise  lavished  by  Waitz  upon  the  music  of  Dahomey 
is  the  opinion  of  Bouche  in  speaking  of  its  orchestras : 
"  Cette  musique  sauvage  ne  sourrait  etre  riche  qu'en 
discords  ".^  Song  and  tam-tam  are  the  usual  accompani- 
ment of  a  rhapsodist.^  Even  at  the  festivities  the  songs 
and  dances  are  most  wearying  in  their  monotony.  Young 
girls  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  fetishes  constantly 
repeat  the  prayers  "  Ah,  Han  !  "  in  two  different  tones, 
this  only  occasionally  being  varied  by  the  cry  "  Kyrie," 
which  suggests  at  once  the  influence  of  Christianity.'' 
Further  West  still  in  Fort  St.  Louis  the  natives  sing 

1  VVaitz,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  238.  -  Beecham,  /.  c,  pp.  167-8. 

■■'  Burton,  Mission  to  Gclclc,  i.  p.  365.  Concerning  these  human  sacri- 
fices, which  will  disgust  many  Europeans,  I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  a 
very  apt  statement  of  Burton's.  Only  malefactors  and  prisoners  of  war 
are  slain.  "  In  the  year  of  grace  1864  four  murderers  were  hanged  in 
Liverpool  in  view  of  160,000  people.  The  last  but  one  of  our  Christian 
kings  caused  a  starving  mother  of  seventeen,  with  her  child  at  her  breast,  to 
be  put  to  death  because  she  had  stolen  a  yard  of  linen  from  a  shop.' 
Other  lands  can  tell  similar  stories. 

*  Bouche,  /.  c,  p.  95.  =  Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  92.  ''  Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  97. 


AFRICA.  13 

some  war-songs  in  praise  of  their  princes  and  generals, 
and  into  these  songs  they  never  fail  to  introduce  compli- 
ments, but  unfortunately  they  do  it  in  their  own  interests.^ 
Other  parts  of  Africa  are  now  so  much  in  touch  with 
civilisation  as  to  have  little  importance  for  us  ;  at  the 
same  time  a  few  examples  of,  as  it  were,  semi-civilisation 
will  be  of  interest.  The  natives  of  Abyssinia  accompany 
their  religious  ceremonies  with  music,  beating  the  earth 
with  sticks  and  emphasising  the  strokes  with  suitable 
bodily  movements.  When  they  become  warm  the  beating 
ceases,  and  they  begin  to  dance  and  jump,  clapping  their 
hands  and  shouting  at  the  top  of  their  voices  until  at 
length  all  idea  of  melody  and  metre  is  lost,  and  it  becomes 
a  riotous  rather  than  a  religious  assembly."^  Nevertheless 
they  consider  themselves  to  be  the  true  Christians. 

Again,  European  influence  may  be  remarked  in  Angola^ 
where  the  negroes  whistle  and  sing  every  tune  which 
they  have  once  heard  from  a  European.^  The  Moors, 
too,  in  Morocco  are  musical  and  have  some  sustained 
songs,  melancholy  in  their  monotony,  while  those  in  a 
quick  teuipo  are  both  simple  and  pretty.*  The  Bedouins 
oi  Jiif  are  renowned  for  their  poetical  and  musical  talents. 
Their  singers  from  time  to  time  visit  the  Aenezes  and  sing 
for  a  small  pour  boire  before  the  tents  of  the  Sheikty.^ 
The  Arabs,  however,  do  not  seem  to  possess  great  inven- 
tive powers,  for  the  songs  of  their  women  (Asamer)  and 
those  of  the  men  (Hojeing)  are  always  sung  to  the  same 
melody.*"  Music  in  Morocco  is  in  a  truly  pitiable  condi- 
tion. In  days  gone  by  there  dwelt  there  people  who 
could  sing  the  Alkoran  in  the  original  verse-metre  in  spite 


1  Briie,  /.  c,  p.  48.  -  Lobo,  /.  c,  p.  27. 

^  Soyaux  (/.  c,  ii.  p.  178)  quotes  in  music  three  Angola  songs  and  six 
Mbalundu. 

*  Lempriere,  /.  c,  p.  773.  °  Burckhardt,  /.  c,  p.  43. 

^  Arab,  and  Moor,  instr.  and  mus.  ex. :  Shaw,  /.  c,  p.  270  scq. ;  Brown,. 
/.  c,  pp.  183-213. 


14  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

of  the  difficulty  of  reducing  the  Alkoran  language  into 
regular  periods.^  Musicians  never  appear  to  be  embar- 
rassed by  this  difficulty.  The  natives  have  both  vocal  and 
instrumental  music  which  is  pedantic  and  commonplace, 
everything  fresh  being  avoided.-  Much  more  musical  are 
the  Ethiopians.  Stanley  describes  their  Canto  Trionfale, 
in  which  the  high  voices  of  the  women  and  children, 
harmonising  with  the  deep  voices  of  the  men,  sounded 
like  the  shrill  whistling  of  the  wind  through  the  rigging 
of  a  ship  during  the  roar  of  a  mighty  storm. ^ 

Before  quitting  Africa  let  us  glance  at  Madagascar. 
The  Malagasy  are  passionately  fond  of  music,  and  several 
of  their  songs  have  been  highl}-  praised  by  travellers  for 
their  beauty.  Strangely  enough  the  language  of  the 
natives  and  their  poetry  have  produced  no  single  rhyth- 
mical work>  On  the  other  hand,  their  music  is  rhythmical. 
The  constant,  regular  clapping  of  hands  which  gives  the 
measure  to  the  music  is  quite  affecting  to  Europeans.^ 
In  addition  to  this  rhythmical  music  they  also  have  a 
sort  of  alternating  recitative.  The  subject  of  the  song  is 
usualh'  declared  in  the  first  line,  which  also  gives  it  its 
name ;  it  is  begun  by  a  chorus  and  answered  by  the 
leader  until  the  chorus  once  more  begins,  and  so  on.^ 
Madame  Ida  Pfeiffer's  report  is  less  favourable  ;  this 
clever  and  resolute  lady  was  the  first  of  her  sex  to  under- 
take these  long  journeys  in  order  to  see,  study  and 
understand  the  world.  At  a  national  festival  the  natives 
sang  and  danced  for  her,  but  all  was  dull  and  uninteresting. 
A  few  girls  struck  a  small  stick  with  all  their  might 
against    a    bamboo    post,    while    others    sang,    or    rather 

^  Addison,  /.  c,  pp.  422-5.  -'  Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  439. 

^  Stanley,  Cooviassic,  p.  489 ;  Egypt.  lustv.  by  Lenoir  de  la  Fage,  /.  c.  ; 
Comettant,  /.  c,  pp.  574-6. 

■^  J.  Richardson,  /.  c,  p.  23,  etc. ;  Sibree,  /.  c,  p.  97. 
5  Ellis,  Hist,  of  Mad.,  i.  p.  274. 
^  Ibid.,  p.  275. 


ASIA.  15 

howled,  at   the   top  of  their  voices,  and  the  uproar  was 
truly  horrible.^ 

The  general  character  of  African  music,  then,  is  the 
preference  for  rhythm  over  melody  (when  this  is  not  the 
sole  consideration)  ;  the  union  of  song  and  dance ;  the 
simplicity,  not  to  say  the  humbleness,  of  the  subjects 
chosen  ;  the  great  imitative  talent  in  connection  with  the 
music  and  the  physical  exertion  and  psychical  excite- 
ment from  which  it  arises  and  to  which  it  appears  so 
appropriate. 

2.  ASIA. 

Asia,  the  "  cradle  of  mankind,"  is  for  the  ethnologist 
a  less  profitable  study  than  are  other  parts  of  the  globe. 
The  lasting  memorials  of  the  most  ancient  civilisation 
are,  indeed,  a  warning  to  him  to  proceed  with  the  greatest 
caution.  To  hope  to  find  to-day  important  traces  of 
primitive,  original  music  in  Asia  would  be,  in  the  face 
of  the  antiquity  of  civilisation  and  of  the  lasting  European 
influence  of  centuries,  a  most  sanguine  condition  of  mind. 
Nevertheless,  let  us  betake  ourselves  to  this  continent  and 
search  for  the  little  that  is  to  be  found,  so  that  the  thread 
of  our  researches  in  primitive  culture  may  not  be  broken 
at  the  earliest  period,  and  that  the  further  study  of  the 
music  of  semi-civilisation  may  be  facilitated. 

It   may  still   be   possible  to   find   a  few  traces  of  the 

1  Ida  Pfeiffer,  Madag.,  pp.  185-6.  For  those  who  are  interested  in  this 
noble  woman  I  would  recommend  her  biography  (the  Introduction  to  the 
above  work).  Her  sad  life,  fate  and  her  unbounded  energy  are  deserving  of 
every  sympathy  and  admiration.  The  mere  fact  that  she  was  a  woman 
lends  additional  attraction  to  her  works,  for  she  observed  much  that  was 
passed  over  by  men,  or  was  carefully  concealed  from  a  male  traveller.  Even 
the  expeditions  of  Mrs.  and  Miss  Tinne  and  Miss  Capellen,  which  were  on 
too  large  a  scale  to  be  entirely  successful,  were  for  a  short  time  crowned  by 
a  success  which  whole  English  armies  never  obtained.  The  slave-trader 
Mohammed  Ches  was  so  much  afraid  of  the  ladies,  whom  he  took  for 
daughters  of  the  Sultan,  as  to  offer  to  proclaim  one  of  them  Queen  of  the 
Sudan  (Heuglin,  Tinnesche  Exp.,  pp.  vi.-vii.). 


l6  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

most  ancient  music  in  China,  for  which  we  have  to  thank 
that  spirit  of  conservatism  which  causes  this  unhappy 
people  always  to  run  unwearyingly  in  one  and  the  same 
groove.  It  seems  as  though  the  immense  physical  power 
of  the  people  for  work  had  led  them  by  some  false  path 
to  an  eternal  mountain  in  which  they  were  to  be  for  ever 
buried  without  hope  of  salvation.  The  marvellous  depth 
and  thoroughness  of  the  Chinese  spirit  admitted  of  music 
being  dealt  with  as  a  splendid  science  which  had  been 
diligently  studied  in  the  schools  and  brilliantly  taught,  and 
which  was  found  in  abundance  in  the  learned  treatises  in 
libraries.  One  thing  only  does  the  Chinaman  lack — 
life,  i.e.,  everything.  The  Imperial  Library,  however, 
contains  130  scientific  works  (according  to  Billert  482), 
collected  in  1710,  which  have  been  carefully  stored  up.^ 
These  are  diligently  studied,  examinations  are  held,  the 
strictness  of  which  costs  some  youths  their  lives,  while 
they  give  to  others  an  invaluable  testimony,  possessing 
which  they  are  at  once  deemed  great  composers.  Thus 
everything  is  ordered,  everything  properly  regulated.  All 
the  other  nations  understand  nothing  of  this,  for  the 
Chinese — a  great  nation  encompassed  by  perishing  peoples 
— are  alone  musical,  and  the  music  of  the  others  is  not 
worth  discussing. 

Endowed  with  such  excellent  principles,  the  Chinese 
have  preserved  from  time  immemorial  an  Ancient  Hymn 
[Mus.  Ex.  2],  whose  regular  melod}^  written  within  the 
pentatonic  scale  (or  within  the  natural  tones  of  wind 
instruments),  offers  a  pleasing  picture  to  the  eye.~  The 
well-known    Chinese    melody    in    Weber's    "  Turandot  " 

1  Williams,  /.  c,  i.  p.  673  ;  Symes,  /.  f.,  p.  508 ;  Billert,  /.  c,  i.  p.  395. 

-  Further  ex.  by  Amiot,  /.  c,  with  illust.  of  the  scene  at  the  singing  of 
the  hymn  ;  Dr.  Wagener,  /.  c,  pp.  42-61 ;  Ernest  Faber  in  Chin.,  Rev.  i.,  ii. ; 
Ausland,  1867,  p.  887;  Aalst,  Chin.  Music;  Williams,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  93-98, 
99-104 ;  Instr.  illus.  by  Anderson,  /.  c,  pp.  134, 142  ;  Astley  Collect.,  iv.  p.  179  ; 
Hipkins,  /.  c,  plate  xlvii. ;  Lenoir  de  la  Fage,  /.  c. ;  Brown,  /.  c,  pp.  28-59. 


ASIA.  17 

overture  is  similarly  constructed.  The  majority  of  tra- 
vellers vie  with  each  other  in  eulogising  Chinese  music, 
while  Symes  designates  it  a  "horrible  noise  ".^  Berlioz 
speaks  in  the  following  manner :  "  The  Chinese  sing 
like  dogs  howling,  like  a  cat  screeching  when  it  has 
swallowed  a  toad,"  -  and  their  instruments  are  veritable 
instruments  of  torture.  Ida  Pfeiffer  compares  the  good 
Chinese  in  their  music  practices  to  savages :  "  They 
scrape,  scratch,  strike  their  instruments  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  produce  merely  a  terrific  noise  ".^  All  this  comes 
from  the  "High  Musical  Council"  whose  duty  is  to  study 
music,  to  compose,  and,  when  a  fitting  opportunity  arises, 
to  perform  it.*  Mr.  Billert  asserts  that  the  rules  which 
govern  the  rhythm  of  their  dances  were  not  derived 
from  their  speech,  and  everything  we  know  of  primitive 
musical  rhythm  confirms  this  assertion. 

This  perfect,  exact,  scientific  system  of  music  does  not 
come  under  our  consideration,  nor  does  that  of  the 
Japanese,  whose  notions  are  very  similar  to  those  of  the 
Chinese.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  learn  much  about 
this,  for  the  Japanese  musician  is  very  uncultivated — like 
the  European — and  he  does  not  willingly  speak  of  his 
music.'^  I  have  frequently  remarked  that  the  genuine 
schoolmaster  spirit  does  not  voluntarily  betray  what  it 
makes  believe  that  it  knows  :  so  Nature  herself  prevents 
the  spread  of  intellectual  weeds.  What  there  was  to 
learn  in  the  matter  Miiller  has  communicated,  and  I  do 
not  doubt  that  the  study  of  this  system  would  afford  any 
student  a  merry  hour. 

1  L.  c,  p.  485.  •^  A  travers  chants. 

^  Pfeifter,  First  Voyage,  p.  iig. 

^  Williams,  The  Middle  Kingdom,  i.  p.  424. 

5  Dr.  Miiller  (/.  c.,  pp.  13-32),  further  ex.  and  illus.  of  instr.  of  Japan  in 
Zeidwitz,  /.  c. ;  Kraus,  /,  c.     The  examples  given  by  Fetis  (/.  c.,  i.  p.  80)  are, 
according  to  a  Japanese  (Mendel  Reissmann,  v.  p.  367),  incorrect,  as  pro- 
bably is  the  whole  Sieboldt  Collect,  {q.  v.)  from  which  they  are  taken. 
2 


l8  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

It  must  be  stated  that  Japanese  ambassadors  used  to 
sing  their  speeches  at  audiences  in  European  courts.^ 
As  a  matter  of  fact  they  had  a  sort  of  "Song-speech". 
It  would  be  vain,  however,  to  seek  for  primitive  music 
upon  which  culture  has  had  no  influence  among  this, 
comparatively  speaking,  highly  cultured  people.- 

Similar  negative  results  are  yielded  also  in  India. 
It  is  indeed  a  fact  that  the  Art  and  Life  of  India  are 
still  as  they  were  in  remote  antiquity,  so  that  the  descrip- 
tions in  Arnold's  Light  of  Asia  may  still  claim  to  be 
considered  correct,^  but  this  does  not  seem  to  apply  to 
music.  In  India  one  often  hears  of  very  ancient  melodies 
which  are  called  Rangs  or  Rangenes.  The  first  five  of 
the  six  Rangs  were  originated  by  the  god  Mahades,  who 
evolved  them  from  his  lovely  head.'*  Their  performance 
had  the  most  varied  consequences  :  night,  rain,  seething 
floods,  destruction  b}'  fire,  etc.  ;  but  it  is  all  a  wonderful 
tale  with  no  tangible  facts.  In  India,  too,  song  formed 
the  chief  part  of  the  dance  or  drama,  though  in  the  latter 
speech  took  the  place  of  song  at  a  later  date.  (Not  the 
reverse  !)  '"  These  and  similar  sayings  and  traditions 
suggested  to  Wm.  Jones  to  examine  the  matter  and  to 
investigate  primitive  Indian  music.  He  tells  us  :  "  When 
I  first  read  the  songs  of  Jayadeva,  I  had  hopes  of  pro- 
curing the  original  music ;  but  the  Pandits  of  the  South 
referred  me  to  those  of  the  West,  and  the  Brahmens  of 
the  West  would  have  sent  me  to  those  of  the  North  ; 
while  they,  I  mean  those  of  Nepal  and  Cashmir,  declared 
that  they  had  no  ancient  music,  but  imagined  that  the 
notes  to  the  Gitagovinda  must  exist,  if  anywhere,  in  one 
of  the  southern  provinces  where  the  poet  was  born  '\^ 

1  Billert,  /.  c,  v.  p.  368. 

-  Mils.  Instr.  with  illus.  by  Hipkins,  /.  c,  xlviii.  ;  Brown,  /.  c,  pp. 
69-79. 

^  Birdwood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  128.  ■*  Ouseley,  /.  c,  p.  72. 

^  Lassen,  I.  c,  ii.  pp.  503-4. 

"  William  Jones,  /.  c,  p.  205,  and  vol.  vi.  of  his  Works. 


ASIA.  19 

From  this  Jones  decided  that  ancient  Indian  music 
was  lost,  although  there  still  may  remain  a  few  remnants 
in  the  pastoral  songs  of  Mat'hura  concerning  the  love  and 
life  of  the  Indian  Apollo.  Further,  he  relates  that  in 
ancient  India  certain  tunes  were  always  connected  with 
certain  hours  and  seasons,  that  the  Hindus  knew  nothing 
of  harmony,  although  they  could  discriminate  between 
consonance  and  dissonance.  But  the  few  musical 
examples  that  exist  are  so  modern  as  to  be  worthless 
for  our  purpose.^ 

In  India,  in  the  southern  part  of  the  peninsula,  a 
few  wild  races  in  the  Nilgiri  Hills  and  in  the  Blue 
Mountains  of  Coimbatore  have  attracted  the  notice  of 
ethnologists,  particularly  as  their  origin  is  involved  in 
obscurity.  They  sing  to  the  music  of  a  Tabor.'  During 
their  funeral  ceremonies  the  sonorous  voices  of  the  men, 
and  the  gentle,  flexible  tones  of  the  women,  are  alter- 
nately raised  as  they  lament  the  wandering  spirit  of  the 
departed.^  The  Todas  of  the  same  race  have  such 
uneuphonious  tones  in  their  songs  as  are  fit  rather  to 
frighten  wild  animals  away  than  to  lull  a  man  to  sleep, 
for  which  latter  purpose  their  music  is,  however,  intended.'* 
Among  the  Todas  and  Badagas  the  Kurumba  tribes  are 
usually  employed  as  musicians,  in  which  capacity  they 
officiate  at  all  festivities.  Their  flute-playing  and  manage- 
ment of  the  tom-tom  arouses  the  wonder  of  the   Todas, 

^  So  especially  the  airs  in  Bird's  Collect.,  by  Ouseley,  /.  c,  p.  72;  Indian 
Instr.,  by  Brown,  /.  c,  pp.  106-131.  Instr.  are  famous  for  their  beauty: 
comp.  Birdwood  (edit.  1880),  ii.  p.  67;  Lenoir  de  la  Fage,  /.  c. ;  Indian 
Drums,  illustr.  by  Meyer,  /.  c,  vol.  iv.  tab.  17.  Remarks  on  the  ear-breaking 
music  of  the  Hindus  of  Nepal  by  Francis  Hamilton,  I.  c,  p.  in.  I  do 
not  think  that  we  shall  ever  get  examples  of  the  most  primitive  music  (as 
Mr.  Chrysander  hoped,  /.  c,  p.  28)  by  examining  the  art  of  India.  All  that 
could  be  obtained  (primitive  and  modern)  is  laid  down  in  an  excellent  book, 
unique  in  its  kind,  by  Captain  Day  (/.  c). 

^  Harkness,  /.  c,  p.  157. 

^  Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  169. 

•*  Metz,  /.  c,  p.  30. 


20  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

but    beyond   this   they  regard   all   other    races  with   fear, 
and  are  in  terror  of  their  witchcraft.^ 

In  Siam  singing  is  the  ruling  passion  of  the  people  ; 
the  audiences  their  king  grants  to  ambassadors  are  carried 
on  in  singing ;  the  people  go  to  the  temples  singing,  and 
sing  during  all  their  festivals.  Children  shout  for  joy 
when  they  hear  a  drum  or  oboe,  and  every  one  is  his 
own  instrument  maker.  This  passion  is  so  strong  that 
missionaries  deemed  it  prudent  to  teach,  with  the  aid  of 
music,  the  first  rules  of  Latin  Grammar  to  the  natives.^ 
Poor  Siamese  !  Siamese  songs  do  not  lack  a  certain 
melancholic  expression,  and  are  full  of  repetitions.  Their 
subjects  are  usually  historic,  warlike  or  amorous,  the 
latter  being  often  rude  and  even  lascivious.^  The  soft,  melo- 
dious tones  of  their  music  offer  a  pleasing  contrast  to  the 
monotonous  noise  of  the  Chinese,  and  hence,  as  Bowring 
declares,  comes  their  preference  for  pleasure  and  poly- 
gamy.'* The  natives  learn  to  play  the  organ  (of  which 
they  are  particularly  fond)  entirely  by  ear.''  Among  the 
Sinhalese  of  Ceylon  music  also  takes  an  important  place  : 
in  some  books  in  the  Pali  tongue  are  to  be  found  pieces 
of  music  ;  ^  of  course  this  is  not  primitive  writing,  for  the 
existence  of  books  proves  a  certain  state  of  civilisation  ; 
neither  are  they  musical  symbols,  the  notes  being 
described  by  means  of  letters.  And  so  Joinville's  remark, 
"  music  in  regular  notes,"  is  incorrect.  It  is  impossible 
to  write  music  down  without  signs  of  metre,  and  nobody 
can  recognise  a  melody  without  such  signs.  So  it  has 
come  about  that  the  ancient  music  is  almost  entirely 
forgotten.     Even   to-day  there   is  nothing  less  gratifying 

^  Shortt,  /.  c,  p.  277.  -  Turpin,  /.  c,  p.  596. 

"*  Bowring,  /.  c,  i.  p.  149.  *  Ibid.,  p.  150. 

•'Turpin,  /.  c,  p.  597;  Siamese  Instrum.,  by  Clement,  /.  c.,  p.  137. 
Hipkins,  /.  €.,  xlix. ;  Bowring,  /.  c.,  i.  p.  147;  Comettant,  /.  c,  pp.  556- 
568;  Brown,  /.  c,  pp.  131-140. 

"  Joinville,  /.  c,  p.  438. 


than  Sinhalese  songs,  although  they  themselves  like  them 
and  even  listen  willingly  to  strange  melodies.  A  grandee 
when  travelling  always  has  a  singer  in  front  of  him  and 
another  behind.  They  sing  alternately  religious  songs  in 
honour  of  their  gods,  and  historical  ones  in  honour  of 
their  king.  These  are  invariably  melancholy  in  character, 
are  never  joyful,  and  are  so  irregular  in  metre  as  to  be 
extremely  difficult  to  note  down.^  Yet  there  exists  a 
scale  of  seven  notes  which  "  possibly  "  corresponds  with 
our  diatonic  scale. 

These  remarks,  however,  must  be  received  with 
caution,  for  other  travellers — ^Tennent,  for  example — 
report  less  favourably  of  the  native's  science,  and  some- 
times state  the  exact  opposite.  All  the  artistic  efforts 
of  the  Sinhalese  have  reference  to  the  national  faith,  or 
to  their  monuments  and  temples.  Their  music  is  derived 
from  the  Hindus.  It  and  the  "eighteen  sciences  " '-^  were 
included  in  the  education  of  their  princes,  while  to-day 
they  are  only  studied  by  members  of  a  lower  caste. 
There  was  no  harmony  :  modulation  and  expression  were 
sacrificed  to  power  and  rhythmic  effect.^  The  natives 
themselves  are  uncommonly  fond  of  their  music,  and  even 
prefer  it  to  ours,  which  they  say  they  do  not  understand."* 
Every  Sinhalese  is  more  or  less  of  a  poet,  but  it  is  self- 
interest  and  not  love  of  Art  which  inspires  him.  His 
poetry  is  always  either  sung  or  recited.  The  Sinhalese 
have  seven  modes  of  modulation,  that  which  they  prefer 
being  called  "horse  trot"  from  its  similarity  to  nature. 
But  we  have  no  ground  for  derision,  for  many  of  the  best 

^  Joinville,  /.  c,  p.  440. 

■^  Mentioned  by  Upham,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  go.  Oratory,  general  knowledge, 
grammar,  poetry,  languages,  astronomy,  knowledge  of  giving  counsel,  know- 
ledge of  obtaining  Nirvana,  ethics,  shooting,  knowledge  of  elephants, 
discernment  of  thoughts,  discerning  of  invisible  beings,  knowledge  of  words, 
history,  law,  rhetoric,  physics. 

•'  Tennent,  /.  c,  p.  470. 

■•  Davy,  /.  c,  p.  239  scq. 


22  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

modern  compositions  are  founded  on  the  same  principle 
(g.o-,,  Walkiirenritt).  NelP  is  of  opinion  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  write  down  the  Sinhalese  music  in  European 
notation,  principally  because  of  the  difference  of  the  scales. 
This  contradicts  the  remark  made  abo\e  and  is  worthy  of 
note,  because  Nell  distinguishes  between  Sinhalese  and 
Tamul  music.  The  latter  alone  is  chief!}'  diatonic.  Accord- 
ing to  Virchow-  this  difference  is  correct.  The  Sinhalese 
is  a  mixed  race  of  Veddas  and  immigrated  Hindus  and  so 
to  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  Tamuls  and  Tanjore. 

To-day  even,  the  Sinhalese  loves  music  and  dancing. 
Howling  and  singing  he  wanders  through  the  streets  in 
the  day-time,  making  no  inconsiderable  din  with  drums, 
tom-toms,  whistles  and  one-stringed  instruments.-^ 

In  Burma,  too,  the  natives  are  fond  of  music,  especially 
when  at  work.*  They  sing  willingly  and  loudly  in  imita- 
tion of  Chinese  music,  and  are  in  consequence  much 
influenced  by  civilisation.  This  is  made  apparent  by  the 
musical  examples  quoted  by  Low.^  Here  also  music  is 
a  science,  with  which  the  Royal  Library  at  Amarapura 
is  plentifully  supplied  :  it  is  the  language  of  the  gods.^' 

Wherever  we  turn  our  footsteps  in  Asia  we  notice  the 
influence  of  ancient  civilisation  and  little  that  is  of  use 
to  us  for  our  present  purpose.  Even  the  Buddhist 
worship  is  so  similar  to  that  of  Roman  Catholics,  the 
music  to  Gregorian  melodies,  that  the  first  Jesuit  to  go 
there  exclaimed  involuntarily  that  some  one  must  have 
preceded  him,'^  To  what  extent  the  Ostiaks  and  Samoyeds 
have  progressed  is  shown  by  their  instruments,^  and  in 

1  Nell,  /.  c,  p.  20I.  -  Virchow,  /.  c,  p.  484. 

=*  Hackel,  hid.  Rciscbr.,  p.  242;  Sink.  Inst.,  by  Nell,  /.  c,  p.  201. 

*  Symes,  /.  c,  p.  485. 

5  L.  c,  p.  47  ;  illus.  of  inst.,  p.  49  :  he  quotes  ten  Siamese  songs,  one 
Burmese  air,  and  twenty-eight  Malayan  airs.  Bengal  songs  by  Malcom, 
/.  c,  ii.  p.  38;  inst.  by  Clement,  /.  c,  p.  137. 

^  Symes,  /.  c,  p.  508  ;  inst.  by  Brown,  /.  c,  pp.  140-167. 

"  Graham,  /.  c,  p.  ri8.  ^  Finsch,  /.  c,  p.  519. 


ISLANDS  OF  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND  PACIFIC  OCEAN.    23 

Russian  Central  Asia,  according  to  the  little  we  know, 
music  appears  to  occupy  an  even  higher  position.^  Mr. 
Palgrave  thinks  that  where  Mohammedans  live  their 
teaching  has  exercised  an  unfavourable  influence  on  the 
study  of  music — at  any  rate  in  Asia.  It  is  well  known 
that  Mohammed  taught  that  music  was  an  expedient  of 
the  evil  one  to  ruin  mankind.'-  Many  examples,  however, 
tend  to  prove  that  this  doctrine  was  not  accepted  every- 
where among  Mohammedans.  The  Arabs  consider 
themselves  the  natural  successors  of  Orpheus ;  Turkish 
music  undoubtedly  influenced  European  ;  and  the  Persians 
as  a  rule  possess  good  voices  and  a  correct  feeling  for 
harmony.^  The  Mongols,  too,  have  tolerably  perfect  in- 
struments.^ The  most  primitive  musicians  are  probably  the 
Ainu,  who  are  very  fond  of  singing  at  their  Bear  festivals, 
when  travelling  and  carousing.^  The  words  of  their  songs 
are  very  few,  their  melodies  monotonous,  melancholy  and 
accompanied  by  hand-clapping.  The  Ostiaks  have  few 
and  simple  melodies,  which  the  musicians  play  and 
sing  according  to  their  own  fancy .•"  The  songs  of  the 
Katshinzi  Tatars,  which  are  often  merely  a  single  word 
oftentimes  repeated,  "sound  like  violins,  as  the  performers 
form  the  tones  in  their  throats  ".^ 

All  this  however  speaks  most  distinctly  of  the  influence 
of  an  ancient  and  in  many  cases  entirely  novel  civilisation, 
which  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  consider  further. 

3.  THE  ISLANDS  OF  THE  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND 
PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

The  races  inhabiting  the  groups  of  islands  in  the 
Pacific  Ocean    are  as  different  in   character  as  in   their 

1  Atkinson,  /.  c,  p.  63.  -  Palgrave,  /.  c,  i.  p.  430. 

•'  Ibid.,  p.  310. 

*  Price,  I.  c,  illus.  of  a  two-stringed  violonc. 

•'  Scheube,  /.  c,  p.  237.  ^  Georgi,  /.  c,  p.  79. 

'  Ibid.,  p.  238. 


24  PRIMITIVE    ]\rUSIC. 

ideas  of  Art,  and  in  their  musical  ability.  If  we  now 
quit  the  Asiatic  continent,  we  find  in  the  Andaman  Islands 
peculiar,  and  indeed  original,  musical  practices.  The 
songs  of  the  natives  refer  to  the  presence  of  guests  or  of 
recently  deceased  persons  whose  merits  are  sung  in  oft- 
repeated  verses.  As  a  general  rule  only  the  men  sing, 
the  women  contenting  themselves  with  beating  time. 
When  greeting  friends,  they  seat  themselves  round  a  fire, 
embrace  each  other  and  begin  to  cry  out  in  a  singing 
tone,  the  one  group  in  high-  the  other  in  low-pitched 
tones.  During  this,  which  lasts  some  twenty  to  thirty 
minutes,  a  few  shed  tears.^  The  songs  are  all  in  unison, 
nevertheless  the  singers  can  discriminate  exactly  between 
the  different  modes  of  music,  and  they  have  derived  much 
satisfaction  and  pleasure  from  the  performances  of  a 
European  military  band.  Mr.  Man  subjected  a  few 
nati\es  to  a  most  searching  musical  examination,  which, 
however,  yielded  the  very  miserable  result  that  they 
had  not  the  remotest  notion  of  pitch  or  of  melody,  so 
that  in  their  own  choruses  the  original  was  very  difficult 
to  find.  The  boys  were  far  the  best  performers,  but  it 
required  very  energetic  drill  to  "  beat  a  few  notes  into 
their  heads  ".- 

In  'Java  the  development  of  music  has  attained  a  very 
high  standard,^  but  European  influence  is  so  unmistakable 
that  the  subject  can  hardly  be  considered  to  come  under 
our  notice.  This  music,  which  is  not  unlike  old  Scottish 
melodies,  lacks  the  leading  note,"*  and,  as  Raffles  has  said, 
the  fourth  and  also  the  semitones ;  instead  of  the  leading 
note  they  have  the  diminished  seventh. 

It  is  thus,  obviously,  music  founded  upon  the  penta- 

^  Jagor,  Andamancn,  p.  45.  -  E.  H.  Man,  /.  c,  p.  392. 

^  Veth,  /.  c,  i.  p.  451. 

•*  Crawfurd,  /.  c,  i.  p.  340  ;  Raffles,  /.  c,  i.  p.  470  (with  mus.  exampl. 
of  a  comparatively  advanced  order)  ;  instr.  by  Crawfurd,  /.  c,  pp.  332-339; 
Land,  /.  c.  (with  mus.  exampl.). 


ISLANDS  OF  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND  PACIFIC  OCEAN.    25 

tonic  scale.  The  frequent  repetitions  of  the  same  pas- 
sages are  artfully  (almost  contrapuntally)  worked  out,  and 
the  melodies  are  wild,  wailing  and  interesting.  In  addi- 
tion to  this  "  pentatonic  "  music  there  is  some  in  minor 
keys,  as  it  were,  but  always  minus  the  leading  note.^ 
Music- writing  they  naturally  have  not,  but  latterly  they 
have  been  taught  it  by  Europeans  with  a  view  to  their 
being  able  to  note  down  and  preserve  their  original  music. 
Land  quotes  several  of  their  orchestral  compositions,  but 
grants  that  it  is  impossible  to  reproduce  all  their  fioritiiri.'' 
This  seems  to  be  the  fate  of  all  "natural"  music  which 
happens  to  be  reduced  to  writing  in  the  modern  notation  ; 
all  the  most  important  peculiarities  are  immediately  lost. 

Mr.  Lay  experienced  this  when  travelling  in  China,  for 
he  noticed  that  all  original  tunes  lost  a  great  deal  of  their 
beauty  when  played  on  the  violin,^  and  the  same  has  been 
remarked  by  others. 

Much  more  original  is  the  music  of  the  Dyaks  in 
Borneo,  who  are  passionate  musicians,^  but  seem  to  have 
been  at  first  neglected.  Crawfurd  says :  "  Borneo  has 
made  but  little  progress  in  Art,"  ^  while  Breitenstein 
declares  that  "  dances  {i.e.,  war-dances  of  men  and 
women)  are  the  only  representatives  of  the  beaux  arts  ".*" 
This  is  however  manifestly  incorrect.  Hein  gives  in  the 
work  quoted  below  such  proofs  of  their  ability  for  drawing 
and  of  their  tasteful  ornaments  as  to  leave  us  no  doubt  of 
their  possessing  much  artistic  talent.  Moreover,  their 
deeply  expressive  poetry  and  mythology,  their  almost 
European  "  Miinchauseniads,"  are  well  worthy  of  notice.^ 
Mr.  Boyle  never  succeeded  in  making  a  Dyak  sing, 
although  they  own  to  a  knowledge  of  both  vocal  and 
instrumental  music ;   but  they  are  as  proud  as  a  French 

1  Crawfurd,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  32-339.  -  Land,  /.  c,  p.  ig. 

^  Lay,  Chinese,  as  they  are,  p.  81,  ^  Hein,  /.  c,  p.  164. 

5  Crawfurd,  Borneo,  p.  86.  *^  Breitenstein,  /.  6.,  p.  253  (instrum.). 

7  H.  Tromp,  /.  c,  p.  2i«. 


26  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Coryphee.  Possibly,  Boyle  continues,  they  derived  their 
music  from  the  Malays,  but  this  is  fuller  of  mannerism 
and  much  more  ponderous  than  that  of  any  other  Asiatic 
people.^  Mr.  Marryat^  once  witnessed  a  war-dance  at 
which  the  awful  war-cry  and  the  dance  movements 
increased  in  volume  and  power  every  moment,  and 
eventually  set  the  whole  company  in  a  tumult  of  excite- 
ment in  which  even  the  Europeans  participated.  The 
natives  stretched  their  arms  out  like  the  wings  of  a  bird 
and  then  struck  one  another  with  their  hands,  beating 
time  to  the  music. 

Of  the  music  in  Celebes  we  know  little.  Ida  Pfeiffer 
heard  it  but  once,  and  that  when  the  Queen  had  some 
teeth  filled — a  grand  event  there.  As  soon  as  she  entered 
the  hall  the  music  began,  and  after  the  ceremony  a  long 
hymn  was  chanted — howled  would  be  more  accurate 
— but  the  entire  compan\'  behaved  in  a  most  exemplary 
manner,  and  during  the  actual  operation  remained  per- 
fectly quiet. ^ 

On  the  island  Salayer  (South  of  Celebes)  the  natives 
have  such  highly  ornamented  bronze  kettle-drums'*  that 
one  cannot  but  suppose  they  are  in  reality  much  more 
artistic  than  is  generally  believed. 

Mr.  Zimmermann  relates  many  interesting  episodes  of 
the  island  Ltizon  (one  of  the  Philippines).  In  his  honour 
the  Alcade  of  Halahola  gave  a  feast,  and  while  the  guests 
were  at  dinner,  there  suddenly  arose  so  terrific  a  noise 
that  Zimmermann  feared  there  was  an  outbreak  among 
the  people.  It  was,  however,  merely  "  table  music  "• 
Drums,  whistles,  ram-rods  hung  upon  taut  strings  and 
beaten  with  sticks  and  stones,  all  helped  to  make  a 
horrible  din.     The   "music"   "almost   induced  cramp  in 

^  Boyle,  /.  c,  p.  220  scq. 
'  Marryat,  /.  c,  p.  85. 

*  Pfeiffer,  Second  Voyage,  i.  p.  443. 

*  A.  B.  Meyer,  /.  c.,  vol.  iv.  tab.  16. 


ISLANDS  OF  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND  PACIFIC  OCEAN.     27 

the  Stomach,"  and  so  shrill  and  piercing  were  the  tones 
that  it  is  impossible  to  describe  them  in  words. ^  What 
was  heard  here  of  primitive  music  sounded  much  better. 
It  appears  that  the  Spanish  monks  whose  zealous  efforts 
succeeded  in  improving  the  race — so  says  Zimmermann"' — 
met  with  no  such  success  as  far  as  the  music  was  con- 
cerned. On  the  island  Zebu  in  the  same  group  the 
accuracy  with  which  time  was  kept  was  so  astounding 
that  the  Europeans  at  once  concluded  that  the  knowledge 
of  music  must  have  made  considerable  progress  here.^ 

Of  the  Tagals,  Philippine  Islands,  it  is  reported  that 
a  chorus  was  performed  in  a  truly  charming  manner  by 
twelve  young  native  girls  formed  in  a  circle,  one  girl 
standing  in  the  middle  to  direct.  The  chorus  was  so 
melodious  and  harmonious  as  to  give  rise  to  the  opinion 
that  Spanish  influence  had  been  in  some  degree  present, 
but  Zimmermann  thinks  this  was  not  the  case,  for  had  it 
been  so,  he  says,  the  music  would  have  been  Spanish 
and  not  native  which  it  clearly  was.*  But  this  argument 
is  not  quite  sufficient,  for,  c.i^.,  Wagner  influenced  French 
music,  but  nevertheless  it  has  remained  at  bottom  French. 
How  far  such  an  idea  can  be  adapted  to  the  present  case 
I  am  naturally  not  able  to  decide. 

Less  of  European  influence,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
less  developed  music  is  remarked  in  the  island  Ceram 
[Mohicca  group).  The  song  of  the  natives  is  simple  and 
tedious,  the  same  idea  being  repeated  a  hundred  times. 
The  Ceramese  laud  the  virtues  of  their  heroes  and  mock 
the  voices  of  their  neighbours  in  gay  songs  for  hours  at 
a  time.  Drums,  Triton  shells  and  copper  gongs,  which 
emit  a  tone  like  that  of  a  deeply  muffled  bell,  did  duty 
for  instruments.^    There  Forrest  heard  the  Moluccan  boat- 


^  Zimmermann,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  123.  -  Ibid.,  p.  122. 

^  Pigafetta,  /.  c,  p.  338.  ^  Zimmermann,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  2og, 

5  Schulze,  I.  c,  p.  118. 


28  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

songs  "which  the  weary  rower  uttered,  each  time  with 
renewed  vigour".^ 

The  inhabitants  of  Papua  or  New  Guinea  have  no 
music  which  can  be  distinguished  to  advantage  from  that 
of  the  rest  of  Melanesia.  Opinions  on  the  subject  do  not 
entirely  agree,  and  the  reason  of  this  may  be  found  in 
the  circumstances  suggested  by  Mr.  Turner,  that  in  New 
Guinea  there  exist  so  many  off-shoots  from  the  aborigines 
that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  sketch  a  uniform  picture. 
Wood  says  of  the  Papuans  in  general  that  they  accompany 
their  national  dances  with  music,  and  althouo-h  the  former 
are  deserving  of  high  praise,  the  latter  is  vastly  inferior  in 
merit.  The  Motn  people  as  a  rule  dance  "very  orderly" 
and  strictly  in  time,  but  without  any  undue  haste,  excite- 
ment or  noise.  They  are  extraordinarily  lazy,  and,  "as 
if  music  were  in  some  connection  with  exercise,"  are  an 
unmusical  race.'-  Of  instruments  they  only  possess  the 
drum,  Kaba,  and  a  jews-harp,  Bibo.  Another  judgment 
is  that  of  D'Albertis :  "  ^^'ithout  doubt  they  love  music 
and  regard  it  with  pleasure"  ;  but  they  do  not  appear  to 
have  accomplished  much.  D'Albertis  sang  a  few  operatic 
arias  to  the  natives  who  surrounded  him  to  listen,  and  his 
success  was  immense,  he  being  rapturously  applauded 
and  eventually  compelled  to  repeat  one  or  two  songs. 
The  women  seemed  particularly  charmed.  "  I  ought  to 
confess,  however,  that  I  should  not  venture  to  sing  in  any 
other  country  than  New  Guinea,"  said  D'Albertis.^  I 
imagine  the  natives  liked  the  unusual  circumstance  rather 
than  the  music. 

The  suspicion  that  for  everything  which  the  so-called 
"  savages"  possess  they  have  to  thank  their  contact  with 
civilised  people  so  frequently  arises,  that  I  think  a  remark 
of  Wallace's  concerning  the  wildness  of  the  Papuans  will 

^  Th.  Forrest,  Nezo  Guinea,  p.  304  (mus.  examp.). 
-  Turner,  Motn,  I.  c,  p.  482. 
^  D'Albertis,  I.  c,  i.  p.  346. 


ISLANDS  OF  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND  PACIFIC  OCEAN.     2g 

not  be  out  of  place.  Speaking  of  the  inhabitants  of  Dorey 
in  New  Guinea  he  says:  "If  these  people  are  not  savages, 
where  shall  we  find  any  ?  Yet  they  have  all  a  decided 
love  for  the  fine  arts,  and  spend  their  leisure  time  in 
executing  works,  whose  good  taste  and  elegance  would 
often  be  admired  in  our  schools  of  design."  ^ 

In  New  Britain  and  in  the  Admiralty  Islands  European 
music  is  much  liked,  and  the  natives  themselves  sing  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  prove  their  great  aptness  and  real 
feeling  for  harmony  and  rhythm.- 

W'e  now  come  to  one  of  the  most  important  points 
in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  the  Fiji  Islands ;  important  because 
"  we  can  observe  in  the  Fijian  division  something  like  a 
school  of  arts  for  the  other  Pacific  Islands".^  The  Fijians 
are  fond  of  dancing  and  poetry,  and  whoever  under- 
stands how  to  teach  them  a  new  dance  is  sure  to  reap 
an  equitable  reward.^  This  artist's  honorarium  is  called 
votua,^  and  on  account  either  of  the  great  soul  of  the 
artist  or  the  small  one  of  the  public,  this  votiia  sometimes 
falls  short  of  expectation.  The  Fiji  poetry  contains  many 
songs  of  lamentation  of  the  badly-remunerated  Art- 
teachers. 

But  Fiji  music  still  appears  to  have  remained  as  it  were 
a  "step-child".  Wilkes  characterises  it  as  infinitely  ruder 
than  that  of  the  other  South  Sea  islanders  with  whom 
he  came  in  contact.  [Mus.  Ex.  3.]  The  men  rarely  have 
any  desire  for  music, ^  nor  do  they  take  pleasure  in  musical 
sounds,  while  the  women  sing  with  shrill,  penetrating 
voices.''  The  tones  of  the  violin,  accordion,  flute  and 
musical-box,  which  gave  so  much  pleasure  to  the  other 
islanders,  had  no  charms  for  them.  Williams  declares 
that  they  are  fond  of  music,  but  even  he  agrees  that  their 

1  A.  R.  Wallace,  Malay  Arch.,  loth  ed.,  p.  389. 

-  Meinicke,  /.  c,  p.  147.  -^  D.  Wilson,  /.  c,  i.  p.  189. 

•»  Wood,  Nat.  Hist.,  I.  c,  ii.  p.  285.       ^  j,  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  142. 

**  Wilkes,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  247.  "  Zimmermann,  /.  c,  i.  p.  345  scq^ 


30  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

own  efforts  are  very  rude.  In  Lakemba,  one  of  the  Fiji 
Islands,  a  performance  by  a  clown  was  accompanied  by 
music  and  was  received  with  rapturous  applause  by  the 
audience.  The  musicians  began  a  monotonous  song  on 
one  note,  "the  bass  alternating  with  the  air;  they  then 
sounded  one  of  the  common  chords  in  the  bass  clef  with- 
out the  alternation".  Some  of  the  performers  clapped 
their  hands  and  struck  sticks  together,  while  a  few  had 
two  to  three  feet  long  bamboos  open  at  one  end  into  which 
they  blew  and  from  which  they  produced  a  tone  similar 
to  that  emitted  by  a  lightly  stretched  drum.  "Although  it 
could  not  be  exactly  called  music,  they  kept  good  time.''  ^ 
This  is  confirmed  by  Williams.'-  At  the  close  of  each 
song  they  gave  vent  to  a  kind  of  war-whoop  as  they  do  in 
Polynesia.  (The  interval,  i.e.,  the  distance  between  the 
first  and  last  notes  uttered  in  this  cry,  is  said  to  be  a 
tenth.) 

The  chief,  Leonka,  listened  with  rapt  attention  and 
pleasure  to  the  music  of  drums  and  fifes,  and,  as  it  was 
night,  a  lantern  was  offered  him  to  aid  him  in  his  investi- 
gations of  the  performing  musicians.  A  youth  who 
played  a  fife  especially  attracted  his  attention,  and,  quite 
overcome  with  astonishment,  he  held  the  lantern  to  the 
boy's  mouth  "  in  order  to  see  if  he  really  produced  the 
sound  ".-^  Oddl\-  enough  many  animals  have  a  similar 
habit  of  hastening  to  the  source  whence  the  sound  comes, 
and  some  of  them  will  even  leap  on  to  the  shoulders  of 
the  piper  as  if  they  really  would  examine  the  source.^ 
Finally,  the  chief  himself  played  a  composition  on  the 
drum,  being  accompanied  by  one  of  his  countrymen  on 
the  big  drum.  King  Thakombau  seems  to  be  already 
civilised  :  he  whistled  "  Gaudeamus  igitur "  with  the 
greatest   complacency.^      At   Rotuma  (north  of  Fiji  and 

1  Wilkes,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  i8g.  -  Williams,  I.  c,  p.  142. 

'^  Erskine,  /.  c,  i.  p.  176.  ^  R.  E.  C.  Stearns,  /.  c. 

^  Zimmermann,  /.  c,  i.  p.  345. 


ISLANDS  OF  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND  PACIFIC  OCEAN.    3I 

now  belonging  thereto)  Mr.  Romilly  made  a  great  impres- 
sion on  the  ladies  by  means  of  a  banjo.  If  this  was  really 
caused  by  the  music,  the  natives  would  seem  to  be  more 
susceptible  to  its  influence  than  those  of  the  chief  group.^ 

Music  seems  in  a  better  condition  on  the  Tonga  or 
Friendly  Islands.  The  natives  usually  sing  while  at  work, 
and  they  also  have  dances  accompanied  by  vocal  and 
instrumental  music  as  well  as  others  without  music  at  all. 
Their  songs  are  divided  into  two  classes,  those  simiilar  to 
our  recitative  and  others  in  regular  measure  and  having 
a  rhyming  text.-  The  former  are  called  Hiva,  and  are  a 
sort  of  overture  to  the  latter,  which  are  called  Langi,^  and 
which  begin  immediately  the  Hiva  cease.  European 
music  is  also  called  Hiva  here,  because,  as  Mariner  states, 
it  is  rarely  accompanied  by  instruments  or  hand-clapping. 
The  Hiva  is  constantly  repeated,  but  when  the  Langi  is 
to  begin  and  the  Hiva  is  nearly  finished,  it  is  generally 
ended  with  a  sort  of  flourish  difficult  to  describe,  and 
stops  abruptly  as  if  significant  of  a  sudden  rush  or  assault. 
The  texts  of  these  songs  are  frequently  in  the  Hamoa 
tongue,  which  the  natives  do  not  understand.  When 
they  sing  in  their  own  language  the  subject  is  generally 
a  description  of  some  scenery  or  a  moral  reflection.'* 
Thus  the  Tonga  islanders  seem  to  be  more  intelligent 
than  their  neighbours.  In  Tongatabu,  Mr.  Labillardiere 
heard  a  young  girl  sing  a  song  the  simple  theme  of  which 
she  repeated  for  half-an-hour.^  She  displayed  such  grace, 
however,  in  the  movements  with  which  she  accompanied 
the  song  that  Labillardiere  was  really  sorry  she  ceased 
so  soon.  On  another  occasion  he  attended  a  choral  and 
orchestral    performance,    at    which     thirteen     musicians 

^  Romilly,  I.  c,  p.  267. 

2  Mariner,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  220;  Meinicke,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  88. 

^  Mariner,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  220. 

■*  Ibid.,  I.  c,  i.  p.  244. 

5  Labillardiere,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  127. 


32  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

assembled  in  the  shade  of  a  lofty  breadfruit  tree  and 
san^  in  parts.  Four  of  them  held  bamboos  from  one  to 
one  and  a  half  metres  long  with  which  they  struck  the 
ground  in  order  to  beat  time,  the  longest  stick  being  used 
to  mark  all  the  divisions.  The  tone  produced  by  these 
sticks  somewhat  resembled  that  of  a  tambourine,  they 
being  tuned  thus  :  two  sticks  of  medium  length  were  in 
unison,  the  longest  a  minor  third  deeper,  the  shortest  a 
fourth  higher,  i.e.,  a  chord  of  the  sixth.  The  musician 
who  sang  the  counter-tenor  accompanied  himself  by 
striking  a  bamboo  with  two  little  sticks,  while  three 
performers  who  sat  in  front  of  him  were  occupied  in 
explaining  the  subject  of  the  song  by  means  of  suitable 
gestures.  Everything  had  obviously  been  most  carefully 
studied.^ 

Wilkes  quotes  a  boat-song-  which  is  sung  entirely  in 
two  parts.  He  remarked  that  men  and  women  were  alike 
very  musical,  and  that,  to  judge  by  the  great  desire  they 
manifested  for  musical  instruction,  the  subject  could  be 
taught  them  with  the  greatest  success.  They  have  indeed 
vocal  schools,  and  their  first  teacher,  Tenge,  was  also  a 
celebrated  composer,  especially  in  the  higher  branches 
of  music.  Mariner  declares  that  their  music  is  of  so 
unusual  a  character  than  a  European  could  rarely  retain 
more  than  a  dozen  notes.^  Others  again  say  that  it  is 
very  European ;  but  on  this  point  the  opinion  of  the 
natives  themselves  is  best  worth  having,  and  they  believe 
that  the  music  of  a  European  drum  surpasses  all  others. 
This  characterises  it  better  than  any  traveller  has  been 
able  to  do. 

It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  Tonga  Islands  whistling 
is  considered   disrespectful   to  the  gods."*      This    is  very 

^  Labillardifere,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  139. 

-  Wilkes,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  20. 

2  Mariner,  Quarterly  Review,  No.  33,  p.  35. 

*  Ibid.,  I.  c.  (edit.  1818),  ii.  p.  131. 


ISLANDS  OF  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND  PACIFIC  OCEAN.    ^^ 

different  from  the  idea  of  the  Hottentots,  with  whom 
whisthng  is  a  harmless  pleasure.  Speaking  of  whistling 
it  may  not  be  out  of  the  way  to  mention  the  different 
attitudes  various  savage  tribes  assume  towards  this  habit. 
Arabs  hate  "  El  Sifr  "  or  whistling,  which  they  hold  to 
be  the  chit-chat  of  the  Jinns.  Some  say  that  the 
musician's  mouth  is  not  to  be  purified  for  forty  days  ; 
others  that  Satan,  touching  a  man's  person,  causes  him 
to  produce  the  offensive  sound.  The  Hejazis  objected  to 
Mr.  Burckhardt  because  he  could  not  help  "  talking  to 
devils,"  and  walking  about  the  room  like  an  unquiet 
spirit.  The  Somali  has  no  such  prejudice.  Like  the 
Kafir  of  the  Cape,  he  passes  his  day  whistling  to  his 
flocks  and  herds;  moreover,  he  makes  signals  by  changing 
the  note,  and  is  skilful  in  imitating  the  song  of  birds. ^ 
With  the  Koossa  (one  of  the  Kafir  tribes)  whistling  is  the 
expression  of  astonishment.^  Again,  the  Burmese  are 
entirely  ignorant  of  whistling.  Mr.  Malcom  has  seen 
them  stare  intently  at  a  person  who  whistled,  and  heard 
them  say  to  one  another  in  surprise  :  "  Why,  he  makes 
music  with  his  mouth  ".^  In  the  Canary  Islands  whistling 
is  so  highly  developed  that  people  hold  converse  with 
each  other  whistling  instead  of  speaking.  The  whistling 
language  is  composed  of  words,  as  it  were,  like  any  other 
language,  so  that  the  people  can  converse  on  all  sorts  of 
topics.  The  whistling  noise  is  produced  by  placing  two 
fingers  inside  the  mouth.  Mr.  Layard,  who  observed  this 
custom,  declares  that  the  language  has  great  affinity  with 
Spanish,  being  in  fact  a  sort  of  whistling  Spanish. 

Among  the  Polynesians  of  Samoa  music  is,  compara- 
tively speaking,  highly  developed.'*  At  Tutuila  the 
inhabitants,  after  a  great  deal  of  persuasion,  performed  a 

1  Burton,  R.  P.,  First  Footstep,  p.  142. 

^  Lichtenstein,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  519. 

^  Malcom,  /.  c,  i.  p.  205. 

■*  Polyn.  Instr.,  by  Ratzel,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  131. 

3 


34  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

number  of  their  war-songs  before  the  American  Expedi- 
tion. To  the  quoted  example^  [Mus.  Ex.  4]  they  added 
in  perfectly  correct  harmony  a  sort  of  second  part  which 
unfortunately  is  neither  given  nor  accurately  described. 
How  little  they  appreciate  melody  as  such  is  made  evident 
by  their  singing  something  different  at  each  repetition  of 
the  song,  so  that  a  correct  quotation  is  hardly  possible, 
and  Mr.  Wilkes  thinks  they  have  no  special  songs.  They 
also  sing  to  dances  performed,  as  a  rule,  by  young  girls : 
some  of  those  present  sing  a  jovial  text  in  two  and  three 
parts  whilst  others  add  a  sort  of  "  deep  grunt  or  guttural 
noise ".  However,  the\-  always  keep  time  well,  which 
here,  as  among  all  primitive  people,  is  the  chief  point, 
melody  being  quite  a  secondary  consideration.  As  we 
have  so  frequently  heard  this  stated  and  shall  hear  it 
again,  I  would  lay  stress  upon  it  for  further  consideration; 
it  seems  a  fact  that  primitive  music  usually  treats  either 
of  mere  keeping  time  without  distinct  tune  or  is  merely 
monotone,  as  there  is  no  mention  of  modulation.  In 
Samoa,  too,  we  can  observe  how  the  natives  always 
become  more  and  more  aroused  during  the  performance 
until  thoroughly  excited. 

On  Pitcairn  Island,  the  lot  of  whose  inhabitants  has 
been  so  strange,-  it  has  been  noticed  that  the  natives  were 
rarely  given  to  dancing,  and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  they 
had  no  especial  taste  for  music.  Their  dance  was  little 
more  than  a  scraping  of  the  feet,  which  they  drag  one 
after  the  other.  The  modern  violin  did  not  give  them  the 
pleasure  which  was  anticipated,  and  they  did  not  appre- 
ciate the  value  of  harmony,  but  they  enjoyed  uncommonly 
the  rapid  finger-movements  of  the  player,  and  kept  their 

^  Wilkes,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  77,  135,  145. 

-  The  people  are  a  mixture  of  Tahiti  natives  and  English  sailors.  In 
the  year  1856  they  were  all  transferred  to  Norfolk  Island,  from  where  many, 
however,  returned  to  Pitcairn.  The  history  of  the  inhabitants  is  given  by 
Meinicke,  Pitcairn,  I.  c.  ;   Murray,  B.,  Pitcairn,  I.  c,  p.  543. 


ISLANDS  OF  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO  AND  PACIFIC  OCEAN.    35 

eyes  fixed  upon  the  instrument  as  it  was  being  played. 
(C/.  Ex.,  p.  30.)  Later,  a  traveller  heard  that  they  pre- 
ferred their  own  music  to  that  of  the  violin.^  It  appears 
that  they  had  not  the  ver}'  slightest  musical  ear,  but  he 
who  stated  this  does  not  seem  to  have  chosen  his  musical 
examples  well.  He  wished  to  teach  them  the  hundredth 
psalm,  and  was  surprised  to  find  that  they  exhibited 
neither  talent  nor  inclination  for  it.  He  might  have  had 
similar  experiences  in  France,  Spain,  Austria  or  Italy, 
notwithstanding  that  people  there  are  musical ;  musical 
taste  is  everywhere  different,  and  it  is  silly  to  approach  a 
powerful  race  of  savages  with  psalm  music  unless  one  is 
content  with  mechanical  imitation,  which  many  travellers 
appear  to  have  been  when  they  could  only  introduce  a 
Church  hymn. 

In  Tahiti  (Society  Islands)  music  is  monotonous, 
melancholic  and  rarely  in  harmony.-  Europeans  have 
at  times  found  pleasure  in  the  pretty,  plaintive  songs  of 
the  children  as  they  sit  in  groups  on  the  sea-shore.  Their 
voices  sound  well  together,  and  though  their  songs  are 
rather  monotonous  they  detained  them  sitting  upon  the 
sandy  beach  till  they  could  stop  no  longer.^  In  Tahiti 
the  Hungarian  violin  virtuoso,  Miska  Hauser,  once  played 
Ernst's  "  Otello  "  fantasia  and  some  variations  by  Paga- 
nini  without  making  the  smallest  effect  upon  his  native 
audience.  He  thereupon  angrily  tore  three  strings  from 
his  violin  and  played  on  the  G  string  the  "  Carnival  of 
Venice,"  which  elicited  a  perfect  storm  of  applause. 
From  that  moment  he  was  the  lion  of  the  Tahiti  season.^ 
This  remark  looks  to  me  like  a  satire  upon  European  vir- 
tuosi, for  similar  occurrences  take  place  among  us  too. 

^  Beechey,  /.  c. ,  i.  pp.  82,  83. 
-  Meinicke,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  189. 

3  King  and  Fitzroy,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  513  ;  instr.  on  Tahiti,  Lubbock,  Orig.  of 
Civ.,  p.  478. 

*  Hauser,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  174-176. 


36  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

In  the  two  groups  of  the  Mcndana  Archipelago — the 
Washington  and  Marquesas  Islands — may  be  found  both 
the  song  and  dance.  In  Nukuhiwa,  an  island  of  the 
former  group,  the  dancing  place  is  paved  with  large, 
broad,  flat  stones;  it  is  Tabu}  The  music  is  a  "wild 
cry";  the  instrumental  music  is  entirely  played  by  drums, 
while  the  songs  are  accompanied  by  a  loud,  regular  tone 
which  is  produced  by  clapping  the  naked  left  arm  against 
the  body,  and  by  smiting  the  ribs  with  the  right  hand." 
In  the  Marquesas  Islands,  on  the  other  hand,  songs  and 
dances  are  onl}-  accompanied  by  hand-clapping.^ 

In  the  Sandwich  Islands  there  are  merely  monotonous 
songs ;  drum-beating  accompanies  the  dances.  The 
former  are  very  soft  and  slow,  but  when  the  dance  move- 
ments are  more  ardent  and  more  lively,  the  tempo  of 
the  music  becomes  quicker  and  the  tone  louder.  All  the 
dancers  execute  precisely  similar  movements,  several 
times  repeated,  and  so  exactly  as  to  give  the  impression 
of  only  one  dancer.^  In  Hawaii  music  is  now  so  "civi- 
lised "  that  troups  of  singers  and  dancers  receive  payment 
for  their  Art.^ 

The  general  character  of  the  music  of  the  above- 
mentioned  islands  is  therefore  (in  so  far  as  primitive 
music  is  concerned)  (i)  preference  for  rhythm  to  melody,  if 
indeed  the  idea  of  melody  is  not  entirely  subordinate  to 
that  of  rhythm  or  of  monotone  songs;  (2)  union  of  the  song 
and  dance,  and  the  practice  of  music  here,  too,  is  a  source 
of  ever-increasing  excitement  and  of  physical  exertion. 

4.  AUSTRALIA. 
(Tasmania  and  New  Zealand.) 

Australia  is  the  "  asylum  for  the  Fauna  and  Flora  of 
past  ages".     Here  the  animal  and  vegetable  world  has 

^  Langsdorf,  /.  c,  i.  p.  i6o. 

-  Ibid.,  p.  164  ;  Krusenstern,  /.  c,  i.  p.  197. 

■'  Meinicke,  /.  c,  p.  255  scq.  *  Kotzebue,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  254. 

•'  Meinicke,  /.  c.,  ii.  p.  306. 


AUSTRALIA.  37 

remained  stationary,  here  even  human  hfe  has  remained 
as  it  was  in  earHer  times  and  thus  affords  us  an  immediate 
example  of  what  we  once  were.^  In  Austraha  a  similar 
history  may  be  recorded  of  the  music  which,  because  of 
its  original  character,  gives  us  a  welcome  picture  of  the 
simplest  Artform.  As  everywhere  else  it  is  also  here 
bound  up  closely  with  the  dance,  which,  in  the  form  of 
mimic  representation,  affords  apparently  more  variety 
than  on  other  continents.  One  of  the  best  known  and 
most  important  dances  is  the  Corrobberree  (whose  nature 
we  will  examine  more  closely  later),  in  which  musical 
accompaniment  plays  an  essential  part.  Beckler  states 
that  the  natives  show  the  greatest  exactness  in  both 
measure  and  intonation,  the  octaves  of  the  women  and 
children  at  the  performance  he  attended  being  "  perfectly 
in  tune,  as  one  rarely  hears  in  a  modern  opera  chorus  : 
they  were  in  exact  accord.  Each  note  is  sung  with  a 
sort  of  expiration  ;  every  moment  the  singers  can  be 
heard  drawing  breath  with  a  sort  of  convulsive  gasp, 
which  they  immediately  exhale  with  visible  exertion. 
By  such  almost  breathless  singing,  by  such  passionate 
excitement  on  the  part  of  the  singer,  by  the  almost  in- 
cessant stamping  of  feet  and  by  similar  movements  of  the 
arms,  such  a  Corrobberree  must  be  made  very  exhausting 
work."'^  The  three  melodies  quoted  by  Beckler  are  not 
particularly  beautiful,  and  are  too  artificial  to  be  entirely 
primitive,  and  for  this  reason  Gerland  is  probably  correct 
in  considering  them  too  romantic  and  idealised.^  Frey- 
cinet's  examples,  too,  are  more  or  less  modern  in  form  and 
can  hardly  be  quite  true  to  nature.*     [Mus.  Ex.  5.] 

I  believe  I  am  confirmed  in  this  opinion  by  the  fact 
that  the  descriptions  of  Wilkes  ^  differ  substantially  from 
those   of  Freycinet  and  Beckler.     What   Beckler  calls  a 

^  Comp.  Peschel,  Volkerkunde,  '-'  Beckler,  /.  c,  p.  82. 

^  Gerland-Waitz,  /.  c,  vi.  p.  753.  ^  Freycinet,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  774. 

5  Wilkes,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  188. 


38  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

ballet,  Wilkes  states  to  be  no  dance  at  all  in  our  meaning 
of  the  word.  It  merely  consists  of  violent  movements  of 
the  arms  and  legs,  while  the  instrumental  music — if  so  it 
may  be  called — is  nothing  more  than  a  few  thumps  on  a 
shield  which  coincide  with  the  rhythm  of  the  songs.  The 
natives  never  sing  in  harmony,  and  the  only  accompani- 
ment is  a  sort  of  bass,  "  a  deep-toned  grunt,  sounded  deep 
in  the  throat  ".  Of  harmony,  of  purity  or  impurity  of 
intonation,  Wilkes  says  nothing.  As  a  rule  the  Australian 
songs  begin  in  high,  loud  tones  and  end  in  deep,  soft  ones, 
while  the  rhythm  is  given  by  boomerangs,  drums  or  sticks, 
one  of  which  is  held  across  .  the  breast  and  beaten  with 
another.  They  have,  of  course,  some  instruments  of 
definite  tone  ;  in  Port  Essington  and  Port  Jackson  they 
have  a  small  bamboo  flute,  the  tones  of  which  are  con- 
sidered musical  in  Australia.^  Topinard  says:  "The 
Australians  love  their  song,  a  thing  monotonous  and  of 
indefinite  rhythm,  constantly  repeated  in  a  minor  key, 
which  scarcely  strikes  the  European  ear  as  being  beautiful. 
In  return  they  are  quite  insensible  to  the  charm  of  our 
melodies."  - 

In  New  South  Wales  the  natives  are  fond  of  singing 
while  paddling  their  canoes,  keeping  time  with  their 
paddles.  All  their  new  songs  come  from  the  North  to  the 
South,  "  which  tends  to  prove — as  Angas  says — their 
migration  from  the  Asiatic  islands  ".^  I  think,  however, 
this  only  proves  their  being  invented  in  the  North  of 
Australia.  Howitt  divides  Australian  music  into  three 
classes  :  dance  music,  descriptions  of  comic  and  pathetic 
events  which  may  have  interested  the  composer,  and  a 
fairly  large  class  of  songs  which  "are  connected  with  the 
practice  of  magic".'*  The  simple  and  somewhat  mono- 
tonous songs  appear  to  the  novice  at  first  to  possess  little 

1  Gerland,  /.  c,  vi.  p.  752.  .    -  Topinard,  UAustralic,  p.  72. 

^  Angas,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  216.  ■*  A.  W.  Howitt,  /.  f.,  p.  327. 


AUSTRALIA.  39 

melody,  but  even  he  gradually  sees  how  powerful  an  im- 
pression they  make  on  the  natives. 

The  character  of  Australian  music  depends  a  good 
deal  on  its  rhythm,  which  is  strongly  marked  and  very 
irregular,  full  of  sudden  changes  and  often  alternating 
between  duple  and  triple  time ;  these  changes  are  brought 
about  by  a  slackening  of  the  tempo  and  a  curious  gliding 
of  one  tone  into  another,  not  unlike  the  slow  tuning  of  a 
violin  string.^  This  all  exercises  an  unmistakable  influ- 
ence upon  the  feelings  of  the  native  ;  music  excites  his 
anger,  with  it  he  rushes  into  the  fray,  hurries  off  to  the 
dance  or  the  hunt,  or  willingly  resigns  himself  to  his 
master's  orders.-  For  these  different  circumstances  the 
native  seeks  out  the  definite  rhythm  which  best  fits  his 
case,  quick  for  the  dance,  slow  and  solemn  for  love,  wild 
and  pathetic  for  mourning.  The  music  is  sometimes  not 
entirely  inharmonious,  and  in  the  stillness  of  night  when 
heard  from  a  distance  it  is  both  soothing  and  pleasing.^ 
Mr.  Lloyd  relates  of  a  native  whom  he  met  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  a  mission  station  that  he  thoroughly  aroused 
the  laughter  of  his  audience  by  his  good  musical  ability 
and  wonderful  mimicry.*  Urged  on  by  promised  presents 
of  tobacco  and  by  his  own  success  he  played  many  new 
pieces.  Unfortunately  nothing  as  a  rule  is  done  to  en- 
courage the  peculiar  productions  of  savages,  and  Howitt 
regrets  that  we  know  so  little  of  the  songs  of  the  blacks 
as  they  might  afford  us  welcome  information  about  their 
mental  capacity,  their  intelligence  and  imagination.  To 
most  people  they  are  unmeaning  and  barbarous  chaunts, 
and  to  the  missionaries,  who  are  in  the  position  to  learn 
more  than  any  others  about  them,  they  are  merely  a  sign 
of  heathenism,  and  must  therefore  be  altogether  pushed 
into  oblivion  and  forgotten.  The  effect  of  this  must  be 
that  sooner  or  later  they  will  be  completely  lost.^ 

1  Howitt,  /.  c,  p.  327.       -  Salvado,  /.  c,  p.  182.        ^  Eyre,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  240. 
*  Lloyd,  /.  c,  p.  455.         ■'  Howitt,  /.  c,  p.  327. 


40  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

But  still  more  than  this  misunderstood  effort  at  culture 
is  sacrificed  to  the  well-understood  action  of  European 
Governments.  The  now  extinct  Tasmanian  is  a  terrible 
accusation  against  this  relentless  tyranny,  from  which 
we  can  defend  ourselves  only  with  very  great  difficulty. 
In  their  wild  state  the  Tasmanians  were  a  merry  people  ; 
it  was,  in  the  first  place,  through  their  unlucky  wars  against 
the  whites  that  the}'  became  "  morose,  sulky,  sullenly 
wretched  ".  To-day  the  joyful  shouts  of  the  Corrobberree 
are  rarely  heard,  yet  once  their  songs'  had  melodies  which 
the  natives  liked  no  less  than  the  Europeans,  and  eye- 
witnesses tell  of  examples  when  the  deepest  emotion  was 
aroused  by  their  national  songs  :  tears  were  shed  until  the 
passionate  excitement  became  almost  tumultuous.^ 

Many  of  their  songs  and  dances  were  borrowed  from 
other  tribes,  and  many  a  song  was  sung  without  their  words 
being  understood.  Both  sexes  joined  in  the  tune.  They 
were  fond  of  making  a  b-r-r-r-o  by  blubbering  the  lips 
over  closed  teeth.  Their  poetry  was  chiefly  improvised, 
its  subjects  being  the  events  in  their  history  of  the  day.- 

Labillardiere  has  declared  that  the  natives  sang  in 
thirds,  a  statement  which  Bonwick  appears  to  doubt. 
Dr.  Ross  also  states  that  the  music  was  nothing  more 
nor  less  than  constant  repetitions  of  the  same  note,^  as 
if  syllables  were  being  pronounced  in  a  soft  and  liquid 
manner,  the  character  of  the  music  allowing  (through  its 
being  mere  imitation  of  speech)  of  this  repetition  as  if 
dotted  notes  were  used.  They  begin  with  the  third  from 
the  key-note  (whether  the  third  above  or  below  is  not 
stated)  and  cease  with  the  third  above ;  at  times  they 
take  the  octave  above  suddenly.  The  music  strongly  re- 
sembles the  monotonous  chaunt  of  the  bagpipes.  Possibly 
with  a  view  to  darkening  the  already  indistinct  impres- 
sion of  his  very  superficial   description,   Bonwick  quotes 

'  Bonwick,  /.  c,  p.  28.  -  Ibid.,  p.  29. 

■*  I  quote  from  Ibid.,  p.  30. 


AUSTRALIA.  4I 

two  Australian  songs/  borrowed  from  B.  Field  -  and 
Edward  Jones, ^  which  are  said  to  be  "similar"  to  the 
Tasmanian.  It  would  have  been  more  desirable  to  quote 
the  original,  so  that  one  might  ascertain  the  exact  resem- 
blance ;  since,  however,  this  has  vanished,  it  is  dangerous 
to  make  any  attempt  to  represent  it.  The  women  sang 
during  the  absence  of  their  husbands  (who  are  seal-hunters) 
a  song  whose  purport  was  a  prayer  to  their  god  to  protect 
the  men.  It  was  accompanied  by  a  charmingly  graceful 
movement,  and  had  a  very  pleasing  melody.*  "  The  voice 
of  the  singer,  and,  in  many  parts,  the  sweetness  of  the 
notes,  which  are  delivered  in  pretty  just  cadence,  and 
excellent  time,  afford  a  species  of  harmony  to  which  the 
most  refined  ear  might  listen  with  pleasure." 

Much  more  trustworthy  accounts  come  from  New 
Zealand,  probably  the  most  ancient  land  on  the  earth's 
surface.  It  is — together  with  a  number  of  smaller  islands 
— the  first  or  lowest  step  in  geological  changes  ;  after  it 
come,  in  order,  Australia,  America,  Africa,  Asia,  Europe.^ 
This  circumstance,  together  with  what  has  already  been 
remarked  about  Australia's  remaining  in  statu  quo,  gives 
to  the  examination  of  New  Zealand  for  our  purpose 
an  especial  value.  It  is  said  of  the  Maoris  that  their 
music  excels  that  of  the  other  isles  of  Polynesia.*^  Their 
songs  are  adapted  to  all  phases  of  life  :  they  row  in  time 
with  a  melody  which  is  sung  by  a  chorus  sitting  in  canoes; 
they  dance  to  music  and  speak  many  of  their  prayers 
(E-Karakia)  in  a  musical  tone  :  i.e.,  it  is  not  the  cadence 
of  the  voices  which  characterises  these  devotions,  but  the 
metrical  language  ("  lengthening  and  shortening  of  the 
syllables  ")  after  the  manner  of  the  Talmud  reading  in 
synagogues.  In  this  way  it  is  customary  to  celebrate  all 
important  events,  suitable  words  being  adapted  to  well- 

1  Bonwick,  /.  c,  pp.  31-33.  -  B.  Field,  /,  c,  p.  433. 

•'  Ed.  Jones,  /.  c.  •*  Evans,  I.  c,  p.  20. 

^  R.  Taylor,  l.  c,  p.  44.  ^  Meinicke,  /.  c,  i.  p.  330. 


42  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

known  melodies.  Such  songs  are  in  the  memory  of  all, 
and  are  transmitted  through  several  generations. 

The  war-songs  of  the  Maoris  have  a  pronounced 
rhythm  which  is  marked  by  certain  fitting  motions  of  the 
body.  On  one  occasion,  when  they  sang  such  a  song  on 
board  a  European  ship,  the  measured  steps  were  so 
vehement,  and  the  stamping  of  feet  so  powerful,  that  the 
whole  ship  trembled.  The  commander  sought  in  vain  to 
stop  them,  but  they  continued  singing  and  dancing  until, 
quite  overcome  with  their  exertions,  they  were  compelled 
to  cease. ^  Strangely  enough  Grey  declares  that  the 
Maoris  observed  neither  time  nor  rhythm  when  singing, 
and  that  the  singer  retains  each  note  at  pleasure.  As  I 
have  no  reason  for  deeming  either  statement  incorrect,  I 
conclude  that  it  is  with  the  Maoris  as  with  the  majority 
of  primitive  people — they  have  both  systems  of  music  :  the 
rhythmic  and  the  free. 

How  difficult  it  is  to  reproduce  Maori — and  probably 
many  other  kinds  of  primitive — music  in  European 
notation  is  seen  in  a  very  accurate  description  furnished 
by  Mr.  James  A.  Davies.-  "  I  beg  to  state  that,  though 
with  great  care  and  the  assistance  of  a  graduated  mono- 
chord,  and  an  instrument  divided  like  the  intervals  of  the 
Chinese  Kin,  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  an  idea  of  those 
airs  of  New  Zealand  which  I  heard,  yet  so  difficult  is  it  to 
discover  the  exact  interval,  that  I  will  not  vouch  for  the 
mathematical  exactness.  ...  I  must  also  add  that  I  have 
studied  the  subject  for  more  than  twenty  years  .  .  .  but 
yet  I  only  offer  these  airs  as  an  approximation,  and  if 
any  one  shall  be  found  who  may  do  more  justice  to  them, 
I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  of  the  result."  These  songs, 
however,  sung  by  Mr.  Davies  himself  according  to  his 
annotations,  were  found  by  the  natives  to  be  correct.^ 
[Mus.  Ex.  6.] 

^  Wood,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  164.  -'  Davies  in  Grey's  Polyn.  Myth. — Append. 

»  Ibhi.,  I.  c,  p.  326. 


AUSTRALIA.  43 

Among-  the  various  songs  of  the  New  Zealanders 
mention  ma}-  be  made  of  one  which  is  called  Totowaka. 
Although  as  a  composition  of  little  value,  it  meets  the 
case  for  which  it  was  designed  wonderfully  well,  that  is, 
it  makes  it  practicable  for  a  large  number  of  people  to 
work  in  perfect  accord  when  drawing  huge  blocks  of  wood 
or  pulling  up  their  canoes.  Whoever  has  heard  this 
sailors'  song  when  loading  a  ship  or  pulling  at  a  rope 
wall  fully  understand  how  it  is  sung ;  it  varies  in  tempo 
according  to  the  easiness  or  difficulty  of  the  labour.^ 

In  addition  the  Maoris  have  airs  which  are  sung  in 
several  parts  {Riircrnrc),  as  a  rule  "Love-songs";  their 
performances  are  usually  accompanied  by  indecent  ges- 
tures. The  Xgcri  is  a  war-song,  designed  to  keep  the 
warriors  in  time  in  their  war-dances.  The  specimen 
quoted  by  Shortland  is  very  ancient,  and  was  imported 
from  Hawaiki.  The  Waiata  is  designed  for  singing  in 
one  or  more  parts,  but  without  action ;  -  it  is  thus  not 
dramatic  like  the  Rurerure.  The  Waiata  cited  by  Short- 
land  was  composed  by  a  woman.  Of  these  songs  there 
are  two  kinds,  the  Waiata-arolia,  or  love-songs,  and  the 
Waiata-tangi,  or  funeral-songs. 

In  the  folklore  of  the  Maoris,  fairies  play  an  impor- 
tant part.  The  Maoris  imagine  them  with  fair  hair  and 
complexion  almost  like  Europeans.  It  must  be  stated, 
however,  that  they  had  an  idea  of  fairies  before  Europeans 
came  to  New  Zealand.  According  to  a  tale,  a  chief, 
Kanawa  (who  died  before  the  first  European  arrived;, 
learnt  a  song  of  the  fairies,  which  is  still  preserved  among 
the  New  Zealand  poetry.  The  chief  point  of  the  tale 
seems  to  be  a  dream  (or  an  illusion),^  the  fairies  appearing 
before  the  terrified  chief  and  his  people  during  the  night 
in  a  forest  on  the  hills,  dancing  and  singing  until  early 
morning,  when   they  disappeared.      These    Maori  fairies 

1  Shortland,  /.  c,  p.  139.  -  Ibid.,  p.  156. 

3  Grey,  Polyn.  Myth.,  p.  292 


44  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

were  always  described  as  gay,  friendly,  and  singing  con- 
tinually like  crickets.  So  much  for  the  Saga,  the  motive 
of  which  is  easily  recognised  ;  modern  investigators  might 
have  reckoned  it  among  the  "phantasms  of  the  living," 
and  have  easily  explained  it  by  telepathy.  Primitive  man 
has  his  tale  and  is  satisfied. 


5.  AMERICA. 

The  original  population  of  North  America  is  doomed 
to  destruction.  "  Before  our  very  eyes  it  has  to  disappear 
and  to  perish,"  says  Martius.^  Whatever  may  to-day  be 
done  in  the  matter  of  preservation  and  education,  the 
difference  between  the  two  races — the  old  and  the  new — 
is  too  great  to  allow  of  their  being  united  in  one.  And 
America  is  not  the  only  land  in  which  this  is  the  case. 
It  seems  quite  impossible  to  confer  the  complete  benefits 
resulting  from  the  development  of  culture,  which  has  been 
in  progress  during  many  centuries,  upon  a  people  who 
have  remained  at  their  original  level.  Such  races  are 
never  in  a  position  to  thoroughly  grasp  the  advantages  of 
culture,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  they  learn  with  extra- 
ordinary rapidity  all  its  vices.  Oddly  enough  this  is 
shown  in  their  physical  as  well  as  in  their  mental 
condition.  If  they  have  not  innate  in  them  the  seed  and 
the  strength  to  aspire  to  higher  things,  they  cannot  obtain 
them  from  without.  Here,  more  than  elsewhere,  do 
Goethe's  words  hold  good  :  Willst  dii  enstehen,  entsteh'  auf 
eigene  Hand. 

The  aborigines  of  America  may,  for  our  purpose,  be 
easily  subdivided  into  several  groups  ;  the  Indians  of  the 
North    and    South,   the — comparatively   speaking — highly 

1  Martius,  /.  c.  It  would  bring  us  too  far  out  of  the  way  to  comment 
upon  the  remarkable  fact  of  extinction  of  savage  races  by  civilised  ones, 
which  is  also  to  be  noticed  on  other  continents.  This  social  law  may,  how- 
ever, hold  good  in  the  domain  of  music  as  well,  and  therefore  I  will  refer  to 
Gerland's  excellent  pamphlet :   Uber  das  Aiissterben  der  Naturvolker. 


AMERICA.  45 

civilised  people  of  Central  America,  the  Eskimo  in  the 
North,  the  natives  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  in  the  South,  and 
the  negro  race  which  is  spread  over  the  entire  continent. 

The  Indians  have  no  great  reputation  as  musicians,, 
and  several  travellers  have  declared  that  they  are  ignorant 
of  both  harmon}'  and  melody.  Catlin  however  denies  the 
truth  of  this  judgment,^  which  he  thinks  too  sweeping, 
although  he  agrees  that  in  their  "songs"  there  is  an 
entire  absence  of  melody,  and  he  also  says  that  "  their 
songs  are  made  up  chiefly  of  a  sort  of  violent  chaunt  of 
harsh  and  jarring  gutturals,  of  yelps,  and  barks,  and 
screams,  which  are  given  out  in  perfect  time,  not  only  with 
method,  but  with  harmony  in  their  madness.  Among  the 
Indians,  in  spite  of  the  poverty  of  their  own  music,  we 
also  find  that  remarkable  imitative  talent  which  we  have 
already  seen  exists  among  other  primitive  people,  especially 
among  the  Hottentots.  Boys  frequently  indulge  in  repeti- 
tions of  extracts  from  celebrated  speeches  which  they  easily 
remember.  It  is  worthy  of  note  how  quickly  the  natives, 
learn  songs  and  imitate  those  which  they  have  heard  from 
travellers.  They  learned  the  hundredth  psalm  and  also' 
several  Scotch  hymns  very  quickly.'  Indian  children^ 
too,  learn  simple  melodies  in  the  Sunday  Schools  with 
the  greatest  ease.^  Some  original  Indian  compositions 
have  made  a  deep  impression  upon  European  travellers,, 
as  did  those  of  the  Hottentots.  Mr.  Powers,  who  did  not 
consider  himself  a  musician,  heard  some  simple  melodies 
which  moved  him  to  tears,  and  he  declared  without 
reserve  that  in  a  chorus  of  Kabinapek  voices  there  occurred 
a  short  passage  sung  by  men  alone  which  was  one  of  the 
most  touching  he  ever  heard.* 

Naturally  this  is  not  the  same  with  all  tribes.  In  Port 
des  Frangais  on  the  west  coast  of  North  America  La 
Perouse  frequently  heard  the  Indians  singing,  and  made 

1  Catlin,  I.  c,  i.  p.  242.  '- Sproat,  /.  c,  p.  64. 

3  Powers,  /.  c,  p.  407.  ^Ibici.,  p.  212. 


46  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

the  following  observations  thereon  :  ^  "  When  a  chief 
wished  to  visit  him  on  his  ship  he  rowed  out  singing,  and 
crossing  his  arms  over  his  chest  as  a  sign  of  friendship, 
came  on  board  and  performed  a  pantomime  which  repre- 
sented either  a  fight,  an  attack,  or  death.  The  song  which 
preceded  this  dance  sounded  very  pleasant  and  tolerably 
harmonious."  If  the  truth  of  this  quotation  may  be 
relied  on,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  song  could  not 
easily  be  sung,  the  "stronger  voices  sang  a  third  deeper,  the 
women  a  third  higher  than  the  natural  pitch  ".  According 
to  this  they  sang  in  fifths.  La  Perouse  only  quotes  the  song 
in  thirds,  and  so  it  is  not  quite  clear  whether  he  has  only 
expressed  himself  badly  or  not  given  the  notes  correctly, 
for  later  on  he  says:  "A  few  sing  the  octave  and  make 
two-bar  rests  frequently,  when  the  song  lies  too  high  ". 
This  octave  too  is  not  given  in  notes,  from  which  we  may 
conclude  that  he  also  omitted  the  fifths  in  the  music. 
It  is  a  pity  that  we  cannot  place  full  reliance  upon  so 
important  a  communication. 

At  Xoofka  Sound  (east  of  Hope  Bay,  lat.  49  ,  long. 
233'',  west  coast,  North  America)  the  Indians  sing  very 
well  together  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  number  of  singers 
is  often  verv  large  ;  the  variations  of  their  songs  are  both 
numerous  and  expressive,  the  melodies  irresistibly  sooth- 
ing. In  addition  to  the  choruses,  solo  singers  perform 
"sonnets"  of  the  same  grave  character  and  keep  time  by 
smiting  their  hands  against  their  thigh.  For  accompani- 
ment they  use  a  rattle,  which,  with  the  exception  of  the 
fife,  is  their  sole  instrument."- 

Among  the  Apaches  (south-west  of  North  America) 
old  matrons  and  small  children  dance  until  no  longer  able 
to  stand,  and  stop  from  very  exhaustion.^ 

Among  the  Hyperboreans  are  the  Thlinkeets  (on  the  isles 
and  banks  between  Copper  River  and  River  Ness),  "who 

1  La  Perouse,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  150.  -  Cook,  Second  Voyage,  p.  310. 

3  Schwatka,  /.  c.,  p.  51. 


AMERICA.  47 

cultivate  music  and  art  "}  At  stated  hours  of  the  morning 
and  evening  they  sing  choruses,  in  which  every  one  takes 
part,  and  if  one  may  judge  from  the  melancholy  character 
of  the  songs,  one  would  imagine  that  they  have  some  deep 
interest  for  them.  The  males  dance,  and  their  wives,  who 
are  "fat  and  flaccid,"  accompany  them  with  songs  and 
tambourines.^  The  Sitka  (Sitka  Sound)  tribes,  too,  dance 
and  sing  continually.^ 

The  Indians  oi  Alaska  near  Fort  Yukon  (once  Russian 
America,  but  now  belonging  to  the  United  States)  had  a 
song  which  was  performed  in  chorus  by  boatmen  usually 
in  unison.  It  seems  to  have  been  an  obsolete  song,  for 
the  present  generation  did  not  understand  the  meaning 
of  the  words.*  At  another  time  they  sang  monotonous 
choruses  accompanied  by  gongs,  the  text  being  "  Yung, 
iya,  iya,"  etc,  while  the  dance  which  was  given  simul- 
taneously was  a  sort  of  pantomime.^ 

On  the  Klamath  River  in  California  dwell  three 
different  races,  the  Ytlrok,  Kdrok,  and  Modok  (which  names 
mean  down  the  river,  up  the  river,  head  of  the  river).  The 
Karok — the  handsomest  of  the  three — have  a  solemn 
"Propitiation"  dance,  which  is  given  by  men  only, 
arranged  in  a  long  row  and  clad  in  fantastic  Indian  attire. 
Two  or  three  singers  then  begin  an  improvised  song — a 
kind  of  invocation  to  the  spirits,  and  occasionally  all  join 
in  a  well-known  "  fixed-choral,"  the  words  of  which  signify 
nothing  and  are  repeated  "over  and  over  ad  libihun'\ 
In  the  recitatives,  in  which  each  singer  calls  independentlv 
on  the  spirits,  as  well  as  in  the  choral,  all  keep  excellent 
time,  and  that  without  beating  time.  The  dancers  lift 
and  lower  their  feet  slowly  and  regularly.*^  A  similar  re- 
port is  made  of  the  Vicird  or  Wiyot  tribes  (Eel  River),  which 
make  use  of  the  same  monotonous  chants  and  meaningless 

1  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  242.  -Ibid.,  p.  112;   Langsdorf,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  114. 

•*  Lisiansky,  /.  c,  p.  240.  ■*  Whymper,  /.  c. ,  p.  234. 

^  Ibid.,  p.  134.  "Powers,  /.  c,  p.  31. 


48  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

choruses,  and  occasionally  improvised  recitatives,  while 
the  time  is  remarkably  well  kept  without  the  use  of  a 
bdto7i.  More  to  the  south  of  Humboldt  Bay,  most  of  the 
tribes  beat  time  when  singing.^ 

The  Yuinas  in  California  only  possess  a  few  monotonous 
songs  ;  their  youths  steal  the  affections  of  their  beloved  by 
means  of  "  flute-playing,"  the  instrument  being  made  of 
reed.-  Another  example  may  be  quoted  in  favour  of  the 
Darwinian  theory  on  the  origin  of  music  (if  only  others 
did  not  speak  against  it).  At  Shawanee  (State  Tennessee) 
the  young  folk  practised  flute-playing  in  the  evenings,  their 
melodies  being  of  a  pleasing  but  plaintive  character,  and 
their  object  to  decoy  the  women  from  the  villages  so  that 
the}-  could  obtain  opportunities  for  declaring  their  love  in 
the  quiet  woods  or  on  the  banks  of  the  murmuring  streams. 
In  the  day-time  gallantry  is  forbidden,  and  this  has  given 
rise  to  the  erroneous  allegation  that  the  Indians  have  no 
affection  for  each  other.  At  night  an  Indian  youth  may 
frequently  be  met  walking  with  a  lighted  calumet  in  his 
hand,  with  which  he  enters  the  cabin  of  his  beloved. 
(This  is  open  day  and  night,  for  these  Indians  have  no 
cause  to  fear  malevolence  from  one  another.)  If  she 
extinguish  it  he  may  embrace  her  ;  if  otherwise,  then  must 
he  depart  "  with  a  disappointed  and  throbbing  heart  ".^ 

If  we  now  turn  our  attention  to  Central  America  we 
light  upon  the  remains  of  a  comparatively  high  state  of 
culture  in  Mexico.  Unfortunately  Christianity  has  in 
course  of  time  annihilated  all  that  there  once  was  there  of 
science  and  art,  burned  the  libraries,  destroyed  the  temples, 
and  broken  the  statues,  to  triumph  eventually  on  the 
smoking  ruins.  The  European  Conquest  must  have  the 
same  meaning  for  the  aborigines  of  the  country  that  the 
migration  of  nations  has  for  us ;  the  Europeans  had  the 
same   reputation  there  that    the    Vandals    had   with   us. 

1  Powers,  /.  c,  p.  105.  -  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  516. 

^  Ashe,  /.  c.  ii.  p.  69. 


AMERICA.  4g 

What  little  we  know  to-day  of  ancient  music  in  Mexico 
speaks  favourably  of  ancient  culture.  Tezcuco  was  the 
musical  centre ;  here  was  a  musical  Council  whose  duty  it 
was  to  encourage  art  and  science,  and  especially  to  attend 
to  the  education  of  the  youth. ^  The  aborigines  appear  as 
a  fact  to  have  been  very  fond  of  music  at  their  public 
festivals,  and  at  their  devotions,  and  at  the  sacrifices  in 
honour  of  their  gods.-  This  is  true  of  the  Aztecs  of 
Mexico  as  well  as  of  the  Maya  or  Quiche  peoples  of 
Central  America,  of  their  drama  as  well  as  of  their  lyric 
poetry  and  their  dance ;  and  it  is  thought  that  their  mimic 
and  gymnastic  progress  must  have  been  so  great  as  to 
have  called  forth  our  admiration  had  we  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  witnessing  it.  This  has,  however,  all  fallen  a 
prey  to  Spanish  fanaticism.^  Even  Torquemada  still 
speaks  of  primitive  songs."*  "  Los  primeros  cantos  von  en 
tono  baxo,  como  bemolados  y  despacio  ;  y  el  primero  es 
conforme  ala  fiesta,  y  siempre  le  comiencan  aquellos  dos 
maestros  y  luego  todo  el  coro  lo  prosigue  juntamente  con 
el  bayle." 

High  up  on  the  towers  of  the  temples  of  Teotihuacan 
(seven  leagues  from  Mexico),  whose  ruins  are  still  in 
existence,  various  musical  instruments  were  placed,  the 
sounds  of  which,  accompanied  by  the  ringing  of  sonorous 
metal  plates  (which  Ranking  thinks  were  gongs),  summoned 
the  pious  to  their  devotions.^  At  Tlaloe  a  peculiar  custom 
was  observed  ;  the  priests  of  all  the  temples  resigned  them- 
selves to  a  fast  which  lasted  four  days,  and  at  night-time 
they  betook  themselves  to  a  certain  spot  accompanied  by 
the  sound  of  horns,  conches,  and  other  instruments,  where 
they,  stripped  of  all  clothing,  submitted  to  a  bloody 
scourge.  Next  they  plunged  into  the  water,  began  to 
beat  about  with  hands  and  feet,  and  raised  a  fearful  cry  in 

^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  492  ;  Prescott,  Mexico,  I.  c,  p.  81  seq. 
-Nebel,  /.  c.  ^  Brasseur,  /.  c,  p.  8. 

*  Torquemada,  /.  c,  i.  p.  593.  ■'  Prescott,  /.  c,  p.  92. 

4 


50  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

imitation  of  the  calls  of  waterfowl.  After  the  bath  they 
returned,  still  accompanied  by  music,  to  the  temples,  where 
they  gave  themselves  up  to  sleep.  It  seems  that  some  of 
them  spoke  in  their  dreams,  others  walked  about,  while 
some  snored  or  sighed  heavily.^  This  half-crazy  auto- 
hypnotism  seems  to  have  been  materially  assisted  by 
music.     So  much  for  the  old  reports. 

The  music  which  we  meet  with  to-day  is  too  much 
influenced  by  Europeans  to  be  of  service  for  our  purpose. 
This  is,  at  any  rate,  the  case  with  the  examples  given  by 
Tschudi,  and  he  himself  acknowledged  this  modern  in- 
fluence.^ The  Yaquis  in  New  Mexico  are  "  good  musicians  " 
and  imitate  everything  which  they  may  chance  to  hear  on 
their  instruments.^  The  same  is  reported  of  the  natives 
of  the  province  of  Vera  Criiz.^  They  particularly  like 
dance-music  and  song,  but  they  rarely  abandon  themselves 
to  them  without  at  the  same  time  drinking  to  intoxication.^ 
In  Guatemala,  too,  among  the  uncivilised  (and  also  among 
the  civilised)  inhabitants  no  musical  entertainments  are 
given  unattended  by  drunkenness,  and  they  only  stop  when 
they  have  reached  the  summit  of  their  ambition  in  this 
respect,  i.e.,  by  becoming  helplessly  drunk.^  A  similar 
custom  obtains  in  Honduras, *"  and  generally  over  the 
Isthmus.^  I  presume  it  is  unnecessar}^'  to  state  which 
European  people  this  custom  reminds  me  of;  it  is  one  of 
the  very  numerous  examples  of  savage  life  in  which 
civilised  man  recognises  his  own  self — not  seldom  to  his 
utmost  astonishment. 

As  with  the  before-mentioned  Jesuit  who  exclaimed  on 
seeing  the  Buddhist  services  that  a  colleague  of  his  must 
already  have  been  there  before  him,  so  it  is  with  many 

^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  338. 

-Tschudi,  Rciscskizzcn  ;  Sartorius,  /.  c,  p.  99. 

*  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  584.  *  Ibid.,  p.  631. 

^Ibid.,  p.  635.  ''Ibid.,  p.  706. 

7/6/rf.,  p.  735.  ^Ibid.,p.  774. 


AMERICA.  51 

others  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  In  Central  America 
among  the  Yukas,  Acosta  once  (lib.  v.  cap.  27)  spoke  of  an 
idol  "  Tangatanga "  which  represented  the  Christian 
Trinity,  and  his  only  explanation  was  that  the  "  devil,  who 
always  attempted  to  imitate  the  mysteries  of  the  Church, 
had  invented  the  idol  ".^  At  any  rate  it  was  more  the 
creation  of  his  fancy,  and  its  name  should  be  "  Acatanca  ". 
It  seems  to  have  gone  better  with  the  Spaniards  on  their 
first  conquest  of  Yucatan  and  Mexico.  The  people  looked 
so  like  Jews  that  they  thought  they  had  discovered  the 
lost  ten  tribes ;  others  believed  that  the  Spanish  Jews 
must  have  already  settled  there.  The  same  idea,  especially 
with  regard  to  numerous  Israelitish  customs  and  certain 
words,  occurred  among  the  majority  of  writers  about 
Indians  up  to  the  present  day ;  and  it  was  at  length  the 
cause  of  a  thorough  examination  being  made,  and  (as  I 
believe)  a  solution  of  the  question"^  being  arrived  at,  with 
the  result  that  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel,  as  a  race,  have  long 
since  vanished.  Traces  of  them,  however,  may  still  be 
found  anywhere. 

Among  the  Yukas  there  were  some  solemn  funeral 
ceremonies  for  a  departed  king,  at  which  several  men  and 
women  especially  engaged  for  the  purpose  sang  funeral 
songs  and  praised  the  virtues  and  deeds  of  the  deceased 
king.'^ 

The  Iroquois  people  seem  to  possess  a  highly  developed 
sense  of  rhythm  in  their  music,  as  well  as  in  their  dances  ; 
their  melodies,  however,  were  indescribably  poor.  They 
were  entirely  unable  to  recognise  the  "  natural  inter\als 
of  a  tone  or  a  semitone".  There  goes  always  through 
their  music  a  dominant,  oft-recurring  tone  from  which  the 
other  tones  vary  "in  every  conceivable  interval  or  portion 
of  an  interval ".  (Does  the  author  mean  this  to  be  a 
remarkable     evidence     of    the     principle     of     tonality  ? ) 

1  Garcilasso,  I.  c,  i.  p.  120.  -  Ausland,  1S65,  p.  12. 

*  Garcilasso,  /.  c,  ii.  bk  vi.  ch.  v.  p.  114. 


52  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Iroquois  melodies,  if  their  rude  minstrelsy  may  be  so  called, 
are  fairly  numerous  and  varied,  and  very  well  adapted  for 
inducing  enthusiasm  or  sadness.  In  their  occasional 
songs,  as  in  the  Ah-do-weh,  both  music  and  words  were 
extemporised.  The  Indian  voices,  especially  of  the 
women,  are  musical  and  highly  capable  of  cultivation. 
Among  the  Iroquois  concerts  form  an  important  part  of 
their  "  amusements  "  ;  those  taking  part  assemble  in  a  room 
and  seat  themselves  against  the  walls  in  one  unbroken 
line,  each  holding  a  rattle.  These  rattles  emit  different 
tones  according  to  the  size  of  the  conches  placed  inside 
them,  and  of  the  holes  bored  in  them.  When  all  is  in 
readiness,  one  begins  a  song  to  which  the  others  beat 
time  with  their  rattles,  occasionally,  too,  joining  in  the 
chorus.^ 

As  in  Central  America  so  also  in  South  America,  music 
appears  to  be  a  mixture  of  primitiveness  and  of  culture, 
and  it  is  only  in  a  few  instances  that  it  is  retained  in 
its  original  purity.  In  Peru  and  Bolivia  music  seems  to 
have  reached  a  fairly  high  standard,  but  it  is  all  under 
European  influence.-  Weddell  quotes  two  melodies — the 
Wainos  of  the  Qiiichua  Indians,  and  the  Callahuayas  of 
the  tribe  which  bears  this  name,  in  two  towns  of  the 
province  oiMunecas^^  This  writer  says  "  it  may  be  supposed 
those  airs  which  are  most  usually  heard  in  Bolivia  are 
imported  from  the  mother-country  :  at  the  same  time  it 
cannot  be  said  that  no  purely  national  melodies  exist  ". 
Of  these,  however,  none  are  given.  Among  the  Incas  of 
Pent,  the  Amantas  and  the  Haravees  or  poets  had  to  keep 
the  national  annals  ;  they  selected  the  chief  events  of  their 
history  for  their  ballads,  and   so  many  names  have  been 


^  Morgan,  /.  c,  p.  289. 

-  Two    Peruvian   songs   (modern),  harmonised   by   Ambroise  Thomas,, 
quoted  by  Comettant,   /.   c,  p.  5S4  ;   Peruvian  instr.,  ibid.,  pp.   577-555. 
^Weddell,  /.  c,  pp.  199,  202. 


AMERICA.  53 

preserved  for  future  generations  by  their  connection  with 
rural  melodies.^ 

According  to  Inca  Roca  it  is  the  upper  classes  who 
must  be  taught  sciences,  and  not  the  lower,  because  they" 
will  otherwise  become  overbearing  and  so  do  injury  to  the 
State.  To  the  duties  of  teachers  in  ancient  Peru  belonged 
those  of  thorough  acquaintance  wath  the  calendar  and 
music.  The  Peruvians  "  understood  a  few  chords, 
possessed  a  sort  of  shepherd's  pipe  made  of  four  reeds, 
each  of  a  higher  pitch  than  the  other.  The  four  notes 
were  descant,  tenor,  bass,  and  contra-bass."  - 

In  Chile  the  national  dance  "  Samacueca  "  is  very 
important.  The  music,  however,  is  a  mixture  of  Spanish 
and  Indian,  and  is  performed  in  a  Chingano  (amphi- 
theatre) exclusively  by  women.  An  old-fashioned,  long, 
narrow  harp  is  their  musical  instrument,  one  end  of  which 
is  placed  on  the  player's  lap,  while  the  other,  which  is  ten 
feet  distant,  rests  on  the  stage.  Another  female  musician 
beats  time  lustily  on  the  sound  board  while  a  third  plays 
the  guitar — playing  full  chords  by  plucking  all  the  strings 
together.'^  The  songs  of  the  A  raucanians  m  Chile  are  less 
of  a  mixture  but  positively  atrocious,  while  their  sole 
instrument  is  a  iife.'^  Equally  bad  are  the  songs  of  the 
Caribs,  who  use  their  instruments  merely  for  signalling. 

In  Paraguay  the  Abipones  on  their  first  acquaintance 
with  Europeans  seem  to  have  been  more  or  less  susceptible 
to  music.  The  viola  d'amour  made  a  great  impression 
upon  them,  when  played  by  the  Jesuit  Dobrizhoffer  when 
on  one  of  his  successful  proselytising  missions.*'  On  the 
birth  of  a  boy  the  natives  perform  certain  plays  which 
last  eight  days,  during  which  time  the  men  drink  freely 
and  beat  drums  and  sing  alternately.^     At  their  funeral 

1  Prescott,  /.  c,  i.  p.  117.  -  Bastian,  Altes  Amer.,  ii.  p.  884. 

^Wilkes,  /.  c,  i.  p.  170.  ■*Waitz,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  515. 

^  Ibid.,  p.  387.  "  Dobrizhoffer,  /.  c,  i.  p.  70. 

''Ibid.,  ii.  p.  218;   instr.  from  Paraguay,  Comettant,  /.  c,  pp.  541-543. 


54  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

ceremonies  a  woman  beats  two  big  drums  and  sings  at  the 
same  time  a  funeral  hymn,  "  the  rest  observing  the  same 
measure  of  voice "  ;  this  also  lasts  eight  days.  Dobriz- 
hoffer  declares  that  women  are  more  easily  moved  to  tears 
than  made  to  keep  silent,  and  this  accounts  for  the  fact 
that  at  night  in  this  district  there  is  so  rarely  peace. ^ 

The  Patagonian  Indians,  too,  have  their  funeral  rites 
at  which  they  sing  songs  of  mourning,  the  women  beating 
the  ground  meanwhile,  to  keep  off  the  evil  one."^  Even 
here  the  Tehuelches  learned  with  ease  to  play  the  ordinary 
signal-horn  which  they  were  accustomed  to  hear  at  Rio 
Negro  and  Punta  Arenas.  Moreover,  the  majority  have 
a  good  musical  ear,  but  their  peculiar  songs  are  un- 
melodious  and  are  a  mere  empty  repetition  of  words  which 
have  no  signification.  In  past  times  the  old  men  used  to 
sing  the  traditions  of  their  race  and  also  a  number  of 
hymns,  but  this  custom  is  now  fallen  into  disuse/^ 

The  Indians  of  the  Roraima  Mountains  in  British 
Guiana  had  very  obstreperous  music  which  was  performed 
at  their  dances  and  orgies.  Men  and  women  led  by  a 
conductor  sang  their  monotonous  songs  to  the  accompani- 
ment of  drums  and  fifes.  The  conductor  used  a  bamboo 
stick  to  beat  the  ground,  so  that  the  tone  produced  from 
it  marked  the  rhythm.  The  text  of  the  songs  was  an  end- 
less repetition  of  "  Heia,  heia  ".■* 

The  Charruas  of  Uruguay  know  neither  play  nor 
dance,  neither  song  nor  instrument,  nor  even  social 
amusements  ;  their  deep  earnestness  seems  to  overpower 
all  their  passions.  Their  laugh  is  nothing  more  than  a 
pursing  of  the  mouth,  and  they  never  laugh  nor  speak 
aloud,  and  even  when  dying  their  moaning  is  low.  This 
characteristic  is  carried  so  far  that  they  never  call  to 
each  other  even  when  at  a  distance  of  only  ten  paces,  but 
they  prefer  to  approach  closely  in  order  to  speak.     They 

1  Dobrizhoffer,  ii.  p.  278.  -  Falkner,  /.  c,  p.  118. 

*  Musters,  /.  c,  p.  181.  ^  Appun,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  297  seq. 


AMERICA.  55 

worship  no  God,  have  no  rehgion,  no  laws,  no  government. 
They  are  covered  with  vermin,  which  the  women  like  to 
catch  ;  they  put  them  on  the  tip  of  their  tongue,  bite  them, 
and  eat  them  up.  (This  habit  is  said  to  be  common  to 
all  Indians.^)  The  same  lack  of  musical  feeling  is  found 
among  the  Guanas  too  (who  are  variously  reckoned  to 
number  from  8300  to  20,000).^ 

The  Gnarani,  who  also  never  laugh  loudly,  had  at  one 
time  no  inclination  for  either  dancing  or  music. ^  De 
Azara,  when  among  the  Guanas,  saw  some  youths  dancirig 
to  a  noise,  and  so  in  all  three  related  tribes  a  regular 
dance  accompanied  by  a  suitable  noise  is  found,  though 
it  is  not  so  general  and  public  as  wdth  other  tribes.  This 
fact  induced  me  to  state  my  opinion  that  every  tribe  in 
the  world  has  its  music  (given  at  the  beginning  of  the 
book)  as  merely  probable.  At  the  same  time,  however,  I 
must  call  attention  to  what  Mr.  Wied  has  said  of  all 
Indians  :  "  Quite  apathetic  indifference  to  all  joyful  or  sad 
events  is  to  be  found  among  all  American  tribes ;  they  are 
seldom  seen  to  laugh,  and  rarely  heard  to  speak  aloud  ". 
(Wied-Neuwied,  /.  c,  p.  311.) 

In  Brazil  primitive  music  of  the  Indians  is  rarely  met 
with,  but  the  result  of  the  influence  of  culture  is  in  many 
waj^s  interesting.  The  performances  held  by  Indians  in 
the  upper  reaches  of  the  Amazon  on  holidays  are  simply 
processions,  masquerades,  animal  pantomimes,  a  melody  of 
drums  and  fifes,  and,  to  a  great  extent,  slow  but  deep 
drinking.^  These  Indians  keep  the  Roman  Catholic 
saints'  days  wdth  the  greatest  regularity,  and  on  Sundays 
they  may  be  seen  going  in  long  processions  to  church. 
Three  old  women  carry  the  "  Saire  "  dressed  in  cotton  and 
bedecked  with  jewellery  and  mirrors.  By  means  of  these 
mirrors  the  Jesuits  induce  the  "  savages  "  to  go  to  church, 
for  they  like  to  see  themselves,  and  therefore  run  after  the 

1  De  Azara,  /.  c,  pp.  77-7S.  -Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  122. 

'^Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  III.  ■•  Bates,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  201. 


56  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

mirrors  until  they  eventually  and  unconsciously  get  into 
the  church.^ 

At  Alagvas-Douradu,  in  the  Brazilian  Highlands,  Mr. 
Burton  found  more  European  than  Indian  music,  although 
this  was  primitive  enough  in  another  sense.  The  natives 
sang  during  their  meals,  a  fact  which  moved  Burton 
to  write  a  short  essay  on  the  subject  of  "table-music," 
which  closed  with  a  classical  receipt  from  Crainbain- 
buli.^ 

Among  the  Coroados  in  Brazil,  song,  dance,  and  drink 
were  all  united  in  one  art-work ;  a  jug  was  passed  round 
among  the  singers,  and  the  oftener  it  came  round  the 
more  general  and  noisy  became  the  music  and  the  dance. 
To  this  they  sang  the  text,  "  Hy,  ha,  ha  ".^  On  the  island 
of  Mexiana  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon  it  is  customary 
to  celebrate  in  verse  (many  times  repeated)  every  important 
event.  For  instance  one  singer  will  begin  with  "  The 
padre  was  ill  and  could  not  come  ".  Chorus,  "  The  padre 
was  ill,"  etc.  Then  the  music  begins  without  the  chorus, 
which  hunts  up  some  other  event  to  turn  into  verse.  Next 
another  sings,  "  He  told  us  we  should  come  next  day  to 
see  if  he  were  better,"  which  is  immediately  repeated  by 
the  chorus.     And  so  it  goes  on  to  the  end  of  the  story. ^ 

When  during  a  drinking  bout  of  the  Yuruna  (Shingu 
River)  the  excitement  was  at  its  height,  a  few  lads  got 
up  and  walked  singing  up  and  down  the  tent,  each  one 
performing  a  sort  of  monologue  by  himself.^  On  another 
similar  occasion  the  herald  walked  up  and  down  between 
the  graves  in  the  hut  (the  Yuruna  bury  their  dead  within 
their  huts)  holding  a  trumpet  in  his  hand  and  singing  a 
monotonous  song.  Each  verse  of  this  almost  endless 
song  lasted  for  quite  a  minute  and  was  immediately  re- 

'  Bates,  I.  c,  i.  p.  310.  -  Burton,  /.  c,  i.  p.  155. 

^  Martius,  Spix,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  235. 

■•Wallace,  Ariiaz.  and  Rio  Negro,  2nd  edit.,  p.  65. 

*  Von  der  Steinen,  /.  c,  p.  260. 


AMERICA.  57 

peated  again  in  the  same  words  ;  meanwhile  the  singer 
offered  the  others  a  drink — not  forgetting  himself.  "Lava 
naim,  Lava  naim,"  it  sounded  without  ceasing.^  In  South 
America  if  we  wish  to  find  genuinely  primitive  music  we 
must  go  to  Tierra  del  Fiiego.  The  famous  American 
Expedition  under  Wilkes  found  that  the  natives  of  Nassau 
Bay  were  excellent  mimics  both  in  voice  and  gesture,  and 
they  imitated  every  English  word  with  great  correctness 
of  pronunciation.  Their  imitation  of  other  sounds  was 
really  astounding.  One  of  them  ascended  and  descended 
the  octave  perfectly,  following  the  sounds  of  a  violin. 
Later  they  found  that  he  could  sing  the  common  chord 
and  the  chromatic  scale  with  scarcely  an  error.  They  all 
have  musical  voices,  speak  in  the  note  G  sharp,  ending 
with  the  semitone  A  when  asking  for  presents,  and 
were  continually  singing.-  Their  mimicry  prevented  the 
expedition  from  getting  at  any  of  their  words  or  ideas. 
The  usual  manner  of  interrogation  for  names  was  quite 
unsuccessful.  On  pointing  to  the  nose  for  instance,  they 
did  the  same.  This  kind  of  imitation  seems  to  be  almost 
a  disease,  and  resembles  certain  cases  of  aphasia  where 
the  weakness  of  the  nervous  system  and  of  the  activity  of 
the  brain  causes  the  patient  to  imitate  all  he  hears  spoken 
or  sees  done  in  his  presence.  Among  savage  races  it  is 
in  some  instances  endemic  (morbid  mania  of  imitation), 
e.g.,  in  the  Philippines,  in  Java,  among  the  Maniagry, 
the  Cossacks,  and  Jakuts  in  Siberia.^ 

Wilkes  says  that  the  natives  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  had 
no  regular  songs  of  their  own  composition,  only,  when  they 
wished  it  to  be  understood  that  they  were  friendly,  they 
would  take  a  visitor  by  the  arm,  stand  in  front  of  him,  and 
jumping  a  few  inches  into  the  air,  would  compel  the  guest 

iVon  der  Steinen,  p.  266  ;  instr.  by  Comettant,  /.  c,  pp.  534-540- 
2  Wilkes,  /.  c,  i.  p.  125. 

^  Jagor,  Philip,  p.  159.  On  the  importance  of  imitation  for  primitive 
art  compare  my  essay:  "  Das  musikalische  Gedachtnis.,"  /.  c,  p.  219. 


58  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

to  keep  time  to  a  simple  monotonous  song.^  This,  how- 
ever, seems  to  hold  good  only  of  one  particular  tribe,  for 
Mr.  Bridges,  who  dw^elt  for  many  years  in  Tierra  del  Fuego, 
mentions  a  long  list  of  their  songs  of  different  kinds. 
Loinra  is  the  name  of  a  song  of  a  man  about  to  wreak  a 
bloody  vengeance.  Tclania  is  a  song  of  mourning  for  the 
dead,  Aona  is  the  doctor's  song.  Tacotts  is  sung  for  the 
amusement  of  the  people.  This  last  is  the  best.  In 
addition  to  these  there  is  a  number  of  songs  with  which  a 
sort  of  superstition  as  to  their  origin  is  connected,  and 
which  were  handed  down  from  father  to  son;  they  are 
songs  with  no  definite  import  but  with  original  names  : 
U polish,  the  w-est  wdnd  ;  Hahni  saf,  the  north  sky  ;  Shiicoosh, 
the  Kelp  goose;  Aloocoosh,  the  loggerhead  duck  ;  and 
indeed  the  name  of  almost  every  bird  is  used  to  designate 
the  different  kinds  of  songs.- 

That  the}'  derive  pleasure  from  European  music  is 
confirmed  by  other  travellers  as  well,  and  this  seems  to  be 
general  among  these  tribes.  The  music  of  a  concertina 
delighted  all  and  apparently  had  some  special  attraction 
for  them.^ 

In  the  extreme  parts  of  North  America  music  plays  an 
important  part,  although  we  must  carefully  discriminate 
between  the  music  produced  by  the  Eskimo  themselves 
and  that  they  have  learnt  from  Europeans.  Wood  states 
that  they  knew  little  of  music  and  of  musical  instruments, 
while  Mr.  Hall,  in  his  report,  says  practically  nothing 
about  music/  and  the  very  little  he  does  say  shows  that 
his  expedition  did  not  hear  much.  Their  favourite  song 
is  Amnnaya,  which  has  no  particular  melody,  sounds  very 
poor,^  and  is  accompanied  by  "ridiculous  gestures".^ 
Other  short   songs    serve  to  greet    guests."     The   ability 

^Wilkes,  /.  c,  i.  p.  127.  ^  Bridges,  /.  c,  pp.  207,  208. 

*  Snow,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  15.  *  Hall,  /.  c,  pp.  66-76. 

•'  Wood,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  717.  ^  Sabine,  /.  c,  p.  201. 
"Ambros,  /.  c,  i.  p.  6. 


AMERICA.  59 

shown  in  their  original  productions  differs  greatly  from 
their  reproductive  talent,  which  is  manifestly  greater.  As 
both  these  are  always  described  by  the  term  "  musical  " 
(about  which  different  authors  have  the  most  extraordinary 
notions),  it  follows  that  the  most  contradictory  opinions 
are  heard.  Waitz,  for  instance,  says^  that  the  Eskimo 
possess  "real  musical  talent,"  and  Nansen  calls  them 
"astonishingly  musical  people";-  they  invented  some 
satirical  songs  directed  against  their  friends  or  against  the 
members  of  the  European  Expedition.  The  melodies 
often  had  their  origin  in  some  well-known  European  song, 
but  not  infrequently  they  were  really  original.  Even 
these  latter,  however,  are  undoubtedly  influenced  by 
European  music,  sacred  and  secular.^  From  this  it  is 
clear  that  Wood's  opinions,  which  at  first  seem  contra- 
dictory, and  those  of  other  travellers  lead  to  the  result 
that  the  unmistakable  musical  gifts  of  the  Eskimo  first 
found  expression  under  European  influence.  This  is 
particularly  the  case  in  Greenland.  Mr.  Parry  states  that 
the  Eskimo  spoke  in  very  loud  tones,  and  screamed  as 
they  rowed  out  to  his  ship,  but  among  all  their  utterances 
there  was  no  real  song,  not  even  an  articulate  note. 
Having  reached  the  deck  of  the  ship,  their  exclamations 
increased  with  their  astonishment,  and  they  expressed 
their  delight  by  loud  and  repeated  cries  which  continued 
until  they  were  quite  hoarse  and  breathless.  During 
extremely  cold  weather  conversations  held  in  an  ordinary 
tone  of  voice  could  be  heard  at  a  distance  of  an  English 
mile,  and  songs  even  farther  than  that."*  A  curious  custom 
is,  that  when  a  bargain  has  been  concluded  the  vendor 
beats  time  on  a  drum,  the  purchaser  on  his  own  back,  to  a 
song  which  has  for  its  subject  a  description  of  the  articles 
which  have  been  purchased.''    Eskimo  songs  and  declama- 

1  Waitz,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  309.  -F.  Nansen,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  344. 

'•'Ibid.,  p.  347.  ^  Parry,  /.  c,  p.  143. 

^  Ratzel,  Lc,  ii.  p.  731. 


6o  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

tions  were  sometimes  performed  in  the  open  air,  and 
generally  at  feasts  immediately  after  the  meal  bv  men 
only.  The  singer  beat  time  on  a  drum  with  a  stick, 
gesticulating  and  dancing  at  the  same  time.^  In  Greenland 
there  exists  a  sort  of  musical  duel  at  which  an  insult  may 
be  wiped  out  by  the  public  performance  of  ironical  songs, 
the  public  acting  as  umpire.'^  At  the  dancing  festivals 
which  the  Greenlanders  hold  at  the  time  of  the  reappear- 
ance of  the  sun,  the  pieces  produced  consist  of  several 
divisions  in  which  each  of  the  musicians  sings  four  songs  ; 
the  two  first  were  entirely  made  up  of  the  theme  "  Ainna- 
ajah,"'  the  others  being  recitatives  whose  short  rhymeless 
verses  alternated  with  the  chorus  "  Amna-ajah  ".^  The 
Greenlanders  are  excellent  pupils  for  organ-playing ;  their 
manual  dexterity  is  as  highly  spoken  of  as  their  musical 
ear  and  their  beautiful  voices,  both  of  which  are  more  or 
less  universal.* 

There  still  remains  to  be  mentioned  one  race  which  is 
spread  o\'er  all  America  and  whose  musical  powers  have 
attracted  the  attention  of  many  Europeans — the  negro 
race.  It  may  seem  inappropriate  to  treat  of  the  negroes 
in  this  place,  but  it  is  of  their  capabilities  under  the  in- 
fluence of  culture  that  I  wish  to  make  a  few  remarks.  I 
think  I  may  say  that,  speaking  generally,  these  negro-songs 
are  very  much  overrated,  and  that  as  a  rule  they  are  mere 
imitations  of  European  compositions  which  the  negroes 
have  picked  up  and  served  up  again  with  slight  variations. 
Moreover,  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  one  author  has 
frequently  copied  his  praise  of  negro-songs  from  another, 
and  determined  from  it  the  great  capabilities  of  the  blacks, 
when  a  closer  examination  would  have  revealed  the  fact 
that  they  were  not  musical  songs  at  all,  but  merely  simple 
poems.     This  is  undoubtedly  the  case  with  the  oft-quoted 


1  Rink,  /.  c,  p.  34.  -Ibid.  ;  Crantz,  /.  c,  i.  p.  164. 

*  Crantz,  /.  c,  p.  164.  ^  Etzel,  /.  c,  p.  551. 


AMERICA.  6l 

negro-songs  of  Day  ^  and  Busch.'^  The  latter  declares 
that  the  lucrative  business  which  negroes  made  by  singing 
their  songs  in  the  streets  of  American  towns  determined 
the  whites  to  imitate  them,  and  with  blackened  faces  to 
perform  their  own  "  compositions  "  as  negro-songs.  We 
must  be  on  our  guard  against  the  selections  of  so-called 
negro-songs  which  are  often  offered  to  us  as  negro 
compositions. 

Miss  M'Kim  and  Mr.  Spaulding  were  the  hrst  to  try 
to  make  negro- songs  known, ^  the  former  of  whom,  in 
conjunction  with  Allen  &  Ware,  published  a  large  collection 
which  for  the  most  part  had  been  got  together  by  the 
negroes  of  Coffin's  point  and  in  the  neighbouring  planta- 
tions at  St.  Helena.  I  cannot  think  that  these  and  the 
rest  of  the  songs  deserve  the  praise  given  by  the  editors, 
for  they  are  unmistakably  "  arranged  " — not  to  say  igno- 
rantly  borrowed — from  the  national  songs  of  all  nations, 
from  military  signals,  well-known  marches,  German 
student-songs,  etc. ;  unless  it  is  pure  accident  which  has 
caused  me  to  light  upon  traces  of  so  many  of  them.  Miss 
M'Kim  herself  says*  it  is  difficult  to  reproduce  in  notes 
their  peculiar  guttural  sounds  and  rh3'thmical  effects,  almost 
as  difficult,  in  fact,  as  with  the  songs  of  birds  or  the  tones 
of  an  seolian  harp.  "Still  the  greater  part  of  negro- 
music  is  civilised  in  its  character,"  sometimes  influenced 
by  the  whites,  sometimes  directly  imitated.  After  this 
we  may  forego  the  necessity  for  a  thorough  examination, 
although  it  must  be  mentioned  here,  because  the  songs 
are  so  often  given  without  more  ado  as  examples  of  primi- 
tive music.  It  is,  as  matter  of  fact,  no  longer  primitive, 
even  in  its  wealth  of  borrowed  melody.     Feeling  for  har- 

1  Day,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  121.  -  Busch,  /.  c,  i.  p.  254. 

*  M'Kim  in  Dwight's  youru.  of  Music,  I.  c.  ;  H.  G.  Spaulding,  Under 
the  Palmetto,  I.  c. 

•*  Allen,  Ware,  M'Kim,  Slave  Songs,  I.  c.,  p.  vi.  :  another  interesting 
collection  of  Ethiopian  negro  melodies  by  Christy,  Plantation  Melodies. 


62  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

mony  seems  fairly  developed.  Soyaux  heard  melodies  sung 
by  negro  girls  in  Sierra  Leone — their  African  home — which 
were  accompanied  with  perfectly  correct  harmonies.^ 
Barbadoes  negro  melodies  must  be  excepted  from  the  half- 
civilised  negro  music  of  North  America — as  Mrs.  Mark- 
nengo  Cesaresco  observes  - — although  she  agrees  that  they 
lose  their  original  character  very  quickly  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  whites.  To  these  belong  to  a  certain  extent 
some  songs  of  the  Bahama  negroes  (east  from  Cuba)  which 
were  sung  before  the  hut  of  a  dying  friend  and  which  had 
reference  to  his  death  :  — 

If  every  day  was  Judgment  day,  somebody's  dying  here  to-day .=^ 

This  verse  must  have  made  a  strange  impression  on  the 
sick  person.  Mention,  too,  must  be  made  of  the  "  song 
of  the  porters  "  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,*  which  is  nothing  but 
a  "  call  "  to  render  the  work  easier  and  more  regular. 

6.   EUROPE. 

The  attempt  in  Europe  to  find  traces  of  primitive  music 
ma}'  be  glanced  at.  As  a  rule  the  Jews  and  gipsies,  who 
have  retained  much  of  their  primitiveness,  are  considered 
in  archceological  studies.  But  the  Jewish,  even  the 
synagogue,  music  has  been  modernised,  notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  many  of  their  old  songs  have  been  preserved. 
Their  sickly  sweet  "  laiiioiiabilc''  is  still  unmistakable  in 
Mendelssohn's  compositions.^ 

The  music  of  gipsies  is  very  debatable  ground,  and 
Liszt  declared  ^  that  all  so-called  Hungarian  national 
music  was  pure  gipsy  music-;  still  numerous  writers  have 
stated  that  gipsy  music  and  poetry,  "  ragged  and  motley 
in  colour  as  are  they  themselves,"  is  begged,  borrowed,  or 

1  Soyaux,  I.  c,  ii.  p.  174.  -  Marknengo  Cesaresco,  /.  c,  p.  5. 

3 Edwards,  /.  c,  p.  525.  ^Wilkes,  /.  c,  i.  p.  53. 

°  Exampl.  by  C.  Engel  {Mus.  Anc.  Nat.,  p.  349). 
"  Di's  Bohemiens  et  d.  leiir  Mus.  au  Hongrie. 


EUROPE.  63 

stolen  from  everywhere  and  anywhere,^  and  that,  on  the 
other  hand,  music  must  be  "almost  drubbed  into  the 
gipsies  on  the  large  Hungarian  estates  ".- 

Liszt's  theory,  which  caused  great  excitement  all  over 
Hungary,  was  contradicted  by  Brassai,  Bartalus,  Simonffy, 
Kalman,  Adelburg,  Czeke  Sandor,  Scudo,  and  Thewrewk. 
The  latter,  especially,  said  that  the  law  of  accent  of  the 
Hungarian  music  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Hungarian 
language,  and  is  opposed  to  the  accent  of  the  ancient 
gipsy  language.^  Again,  Liszt  is  said  to  have  recognised 
the  "decisive  value"  of  the  argument  of  rhythm,  but 
insisted  upon  the  fact  that  the  "  gipsies  brought  something 
with  them,"  and  maintained  that  the  harmony  was  intro- 
duced into  the  Hungarian  music  by  the  gipsies.^  I  confess 
I  cannot  see  the  "  decisive  value  "  of  the  argument  of 
rhythm,  for  we  can  never  say  that,  e.g.,  Italian  music  has 
a  rhythm  peculiar  to  the  Italian  language.  On  the 
contrary,  musical  rhythm  shows  such  great  variations 
that  it  can  be  adapted  to  any  language.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  cannot  understand  how  the  gipsies  could  have 
brought  harmony  from  India,  where  there  was  no  harmony 
in  music.  Decisive,  however,  seems  to  me  the  fact  that 
the  melody  of  an  English  gipsy  song  has  nothing  in 
common  with  Hungarian  gipsy  music. ^  Still  I  think  that 
gipsy  music  will,  like  the  gipsies  themselves,  remain  a 
puzzle  for  many  an  anthropologist  and  musician,^  while 
the  romantic  and  poetic  glamour  of  gipsy  music  will  soon 

1  St.  Bartalus,  /.  c,  p.  60. 

-A.  V.  Adelburg,  /.  c,  p.  viii.,  literature  on  gipsies  by  Liebich,  /.  c.  ; 
instrum.  by  Comettant,  /.  c,  pp.  282-284. 

3  Thewrewk,  /.  c,  p.  316.  *Ibid.,  I.  c,  i.  p.  317. 

5  Sampson,  /.  c,  pp.  81-S4. 

6  A  most  complete  list  of  the  literature  on  gipsies  is  given  in  the  book 
of  the  Austrian  Archduke  Josef  (/.  c,  pp.  327-343),  himself  an  authority  on 
this  subject.  As  the  book  is  unfortunately  written  in  Hungarian  only,  I  was 
obliged  to  use  the  English  abstract  of  it  in  jfonrii.  Gyps.  Lore  Soc,  ii.  pp.  14S- 
160.  Ten  original  melodies  of  Transylvanian  tent-gipsies  in  Jonrn.  Gyps. 
Lore  Soc,  i.  p.  100. 


64  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

disappear  if  we  bear  in  mind  what  all  the  writers  on  this 
subject  say:  "The  Bohemiennes  sing  only  when  they  are 
paid  for  ". 

Sorciers,  bateleurs  ou  filous 

Reste  immonde 
D'un  ancien  monde  ; 
Sorciers,  bateleurs  ou  filous 

Gais  bohemiens,  d'ou  venez-vous  ? 

Despite  all  that  has  been  said  as  to  the  influencing  and 
modernising  of  primitive  music  in  all  parts  of  the  world, 
it  is  not  yet  entirely  lost,  and  we  still  have  too  many  writings 
of  travellers  who  were  the  first  Europeans  to  enter  strange 
countries,  to  ignore  or  pass  over  the  entire  music  of  primi- 
tive people,  as  is  so  often  done  as  to  be  almost  the  rule. 
Of  the  music  of  savages  we  possess  not  onl}-  more  direct 
knowledge  than  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  music,  we  have 
in  many  instances  also,  not  only  the  musical  but  the 
primitive  condition  before  us,  in  which  mankind  existed  in 
the  most  ancient  geological  period. 

In  any  attempt  to  turn  the  musico-ethnological  material 
to  account  by  systematising  and  classifying  it  perfectly,  I 
do  not  think  myself  bound  to  search  out  laws  and  all  that 
bears  upon  the  matter  of  music,  race,  climate,  etc.,  because 
I  do  not  think  any  such  necessity  has  arisen  out  of  the 
nature  of  the  subject  itself.  Nevertheless  I  cannot  refrain 
from  stating  that  some  such  attempts  have  been  made. 

Fetis  in  his  day  had  the  idea  of  calling  ethnological 
studies  in  music  to  his  aid  in  determining  the  race  of  a 
people.^  For  this  purpose  he  specially  used  the  musical 
system,  or  rather  the  musical  scale,  but  I  am  afraid  this 
method  can  lead  to  no  exact  results.  Far  from  it  in  fact, 
for  if  two  races  have  the  same  scale  there  follows  nothing 
to  show  its  common  derivation.  Correctly  enough  at  the 
time  when  Fetis  declared  his  idea,  Gaussin  -  had  pro- 
mulgated the  notion  that  the  music  of  a  nation  developed 
as  civilisation  increased,  and  might  very  soon  assume  a 
totally  different  form  from  that  of  a  branch  of  the  same 

1  Fetis,  Classijicat.  dcs  races  hnniaincs,  I.  c,  p.  134.         '^Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  143. 


EUROPE.  65 

race  which  has  stagnated.  Among  quite  primitive  people 
the  idea  of  a  systematic  "scale"  is  useless.  At  any 
moment  they  may  be  able  to  systematically  arrange  and 
retain  a  succession  of  notes,  and  to  this  extent  differ  from 
others  of  the  same  race ;  or  they  can  even  adopt  the 
system  of  civilised  people.  It  is  true  that  Broca  ^  and 
Topinard  -  seem  to  have  declared  for  Fetis,  and  there 
are  certain  cases  in  which  the  community  of  musical 
systems  along  with  many  other  characteristics  coincides 
with  the  community  of  origin  ;  but  none  are  productive 
of  more  satisfactory  results  than  are  skull  measurements 
or  divisions  according  to  the  colour  of  the  skin  or  hair. 
It  is  quite  as  difficult  a  matter  to  scientifically  establish 
a  pure  musical  type  as  the  purity  of  a  race.  My  own 
attempt  to  find  out  a  conformity  between  certain  races  and 
musical  talent  has  been,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  com- 
pletel}-  unsuccessful,  although  I  recognise  the  fact  that 
in  the  matter  of  systematisation  there  will  always  remain 
something  for  speculative  minds  to  do.  As  already  three 
distinct  musical  stages  have  been  found  which  are  said  to 
correspond  with  the  use  of  certain  instruments,  I  would 
not  be  surprised  if  some  one  were  to  discover  (say)  seven 
different  races  with  sevenfold  musical  gifts.  However 
this  may  be,  it  would  be  better  to  omit  all  gratuitous  and 
subjective  ideas  of  "  musical  talent  "  in  expressing  "ethno- 
logical judgments,"  and  at  the  same  time  to  state  clearly 
if  composition  or  reproduction  is  meant,  beautiful  voices, 
songs,  or  the  playing  upon  instruments,  love  of  music  in 
general,  or  individual  efficiency,  teachableness,  or  diligence 
or  merely  possessing  imitative  talent,  good  ear,  feeling  of 
rhythm,  feeling  or  judgment,  memory  for  absolute  pitch  or 
melody,  feeling  for  harmony  or  melody,  etc.  All  this  is 
usually  called  "musical,"  and  one  can  only  think  how 
various  opinions  must  be. 

^  Fetis,  Classijicat.  des  races  hiimaines,  I.  c,  p.  145. 
-Topinard,  U Anthropologic,  p.  6. 

5 


CHAPTER  II. 
SINGERS  AND  COMPOSERS  IN   PRIMITIVE  TIMES. 

Over  almost  the  entire  African  Continent  we  find  a  sort 
of  wandering  minstrel,  a  person  whose  vocation  is  the 
glorification  of  the  mighty  chief  in  whose  service  he  may 
be,  and  to  demonstrate  for  the  spreading  of  his  fame  the 
inexhaustible  power  and  beauty  of  art.  This  is  remarkable, 
as  art,  or  at  any  rate  music,  is  a  popular  festival  in  which 
every  one  takes  part,  not  merely  as  one  of  the  audience  but 
as  a  performer.  So  it  cannot  be  said  that  art  is  indebted 
to  these  professional  artists  for  its  origin,  and  they,  for 
their  posts,  to  the  graciousness  and  munificence  of  the 
chief.  On  the  contrary,  what  is  achieved  in  this  way  is 
throughout  a  lower  kind  of  art,  and,  it  appears  to  me,  a 
product  of  later — although  still  a  very  primitive — state  of 
culture. 

These  singers  are,  in  Africa,  a  sort  of  sycophants. 
Each  chief  keeps  two  or  three  of  them  who  have  to 
accompany  strangers  by  way  of  state,  and  to  sing  songs  in 
praise  of  the  white  man  and  of  the  king.  It  is,  too,  their 
duty  to  praise  the  "  wit  and  genius  "  of  any  great  man 
into  whose  service  they  may  for  a  short  time  be  taken.  If 
the  expected  presents  are  not  given  they  go  to  the  villages 
round  about  and  retract  all  that  they  have  previously  said 
in  praise  of  their  "  protectors ".  They  are  renowned  for 
their  great  wealth,and  their  wives  possess  more  "  blue-stones 
and  crystals  than  does  the  chief's  wife  ".  Despite  this, 
they  are  considered  disreputable  ;  they  are  even  denied  the 
common  rite  of  burial,  and  their  corpses  are  placed  upright 
in  a  hollow  tree-trunk  and  there  left  to  rot.^ 

^  Astley  Collect.,  ii.  pp.  277-279. 

•   (66) 


SINGERS    AND    COMPOSERS    IN    PRIMITIVE    TIMES.         67 

It  is  remarkable  at  what  an  early  date  art  was  employed 
for  economic  purposes,  how  from  the  very  beginning  this 
manner  of  practising  art  was  despised,  and  yet  how  these 
"  artists'  "  power  was  bowed  down  to  in  fear,  while  at  the 
same  time  the  contemned  economic  effect  was  assisted 
and  propagated  by  voluntary  contributions. 

Mr.  Jobson  found  on  the  Gambia  each  chief  surrounded 
by  a  number  of  such  musicians  who  were  called  "  Jcllc  "  or 
*'  Jelleinen".  The  most  important  occasions  upon  which 
they  had  to  perform  were  the  festivals  of  circumcision 
and  at  funerals.  At  the  former  the  entire  country-side 
assembled,  while  music,  yelling,  and  dancing  were  in- 
dulged in  all  through  the  night. ^  In  addition,  male  and 
female  singers  celebrate  every  event  of  interest  in  suitable 
songs.  "  Flattery  is  naturally  the  standing  reproach 
against  this  class  of  bards,"  -  and  in  this  respect  culture 
has  not  induced  the  slightest  improvement. 

Mr.  Lenz  says  of  these  Griots  (as  they  are  called  in 
some  places)  that  they  are  invariably  attached  to  the 
suites  of  Sheiks,  they  laud  them  in  their  melodious  songs, 
and,  indeed,  any  one  else  who  will  pay  them  for  it.  They 
are  not  greatly  respected,  and  are  compelled  to  go  out  with 
war  expeditions  and  on  predatory  excursions  in  order  to 
encourage  the  others  ;  they  also  act  as  spies. ^ 

In  Bechuanaland  Mr.  Mohr  came  across  a  troop  of 
these  wandering  minstrels  (who  are  there  called  Amatongas), 
natives  with  six  wives,  who  were  en  roiite  to  the  Bechuana 
chief  Matcheen,  to  give  performances  and  to  dance/ 

Among  the  Niam-Niam  there  are  musicians  who 
generally  perform  in  the  most  fantastic  costumes,  deco- 
rated with  feathers,  roots,  etc.  Several  travellers  have 
called  them  Minnesingers  ;  the  Arabs  of  the  Sudan  call 
them    "  Lashash  "  ;    the    Niam-Niam    "  Nzangah  "  :    in 

^H.  Murray,  /.  c,  p.  74;  Jcllcs  of  the  Soiilinia,  Laing,  /.  c,  p.  368. 
-Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  443.  ^Lenz,  Tiinbitctii,  ii.  pp.  217-218. 

^  Mohr,  /.  c,  i.  p.  165. 


68  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Senegambia  they  are  known  as  "Griots,"^  among  the 
negroes  of  West  Africa  as  "  Guehues  "."' 

As  often  as  one  of  this  brotherhood  appears,  he  begins  at 
once  to  set  forth  every  detail  of  his  journey  and  experiences 
in  an  emphatic  recitative,  at  the  end  of  which  he  never 
forgets  to  appeal  to  the  generosity  of  his  audience. 

Among  the  numerous  unedifying  examples  there  may 
be  found  here  and  there  noteworthy  exceptions.  Thus  we 
hear  of  a  blind  man  who  at  certain  times  visited  Ukuin  in 
East  Africa,  where,  without  being  led  even  by  a  dog,  he 
could  find  his  way  through  every  street.  Hundreds  of  the 
inhabitants  welcomed  him  and  listened  to  him,  among 
them  being  the  Sultan,  and  all  united  in  a  chorus  "of 
almost  devotional  music  ".  Holding  his  hand  before  his 
mouth  he  produced  a  quite  pleasing  tone  which  could  be 
heard  at  a  great  distance,  and  every  one  was  delighted, 
especially  with  the  peculiar  shrill  falsetto  notes.  Another 
blind  man  taught  the  village  }outh  the  songs  of  their 
country — the}-  have  realh'  charming  national  songs — to 
which  he  beat  time  with  his  foot.^ 

In  Australia  too,  there  are  to  be  found  such  professional 
singers,  and  some  tribes  have  whole  families  of  bards. 
Many  of  these  compose  under  natural,  others  under  "super- 
natural "  influences.  To  the  latter  belongs  the  case  in 
which  the  bard  receives  in  a  dream  his  songs  (poetr}- 
too)  from  the  spirit  of  some  departed  person — usually  a 
relation.^ 

Among  the  Australian  poets  one  or  two  are  mentioned 
as  being  greatly  renowned.  Grey  was,  however,  not  in  a 
position  to  determine  if  they  still  lived  and  worked  or  if 
they  only  existed  in  folklore.'' 

It  is  surprising  to  find  in  the  lower  strata  of  society — 
at    any  rate    as    regards    artistic    invention — the    idea    of 

1  Schweinfurth,  /.  c,  i.  p.  295.  -  Caillie,  /.  c,  i.  p.  93. 

3  Grant,  /.  c,  pp.  83,  84.  ^  Howitt,  /.  c,  p.  330. 

^Grey,  .(4Hs/r.,  p.  304. 


SINGERS    AND    COMPOSERS    IN    PRIMITIVE    TIMES.         6g 

intellectual  copyright,  as  it  were.  It  is  the  case  that  not 
only  is  the  poet  who  writes  a  song — music  or  only  text — 
recognised  as  its  owner,  but  he  also  receives  handsome 
gifts  as  payment  for  his  master-work.  We  have  already 
mentioned  an  example  of  this  kind  in  Fiji  ;  the  whole 
institution  of  professional  singers  in  Africa  affords  us 
further  evidence,  although  in  this  case  it  is  tinged  with 
something  other  than  the  artistic.  This  custom  is  most 
decisive  in  the  Andamans,  where,  at  the  great  music 
festivals,  the  composer  only  may  sing  his  own  songs,  how- 
ever popular  they  may  be.  His  rights  are  fully  recognised, 
and  it  is  just  on  solemn  occasions  that  the  honour  of 
performance  should  be  his.^  This  recognition  on  the  part 
of  the  public  is  as  remarkable  as  the  wish  of  the  artist. 
Two  M'Quichis  once  performed  their  dances  before  Herr 
Schiitt,  during  which  the  native  members  of  his  expedi- 
tion sang  to  a  drum-accompaniment  and  made  handsome 
presents  to  the  dancers  of  pearls,  powder,  and  some  tools. 
Again  and  again  did  they  stretch  out  their  hands  asking 
for  more,  and  the  people  invariably  gave  what  they  could 
possibly  spare.- 

The  vocal  art,  as  such,  consists  almost  everywhere  of 
the  same  very  simple  principle :  the  louder  the  better. 
This,  in  Africa  at  least,  is  with  very  few  exceptions  every- 
where the  case,  and  primitive  people  generally  have  the 
means  of  carrying  out  the  principle.  In  Madagascar  the 
strength  of  the  "  musical  voices  "  was  especially  satis- 
factory, and  although  male  voices  there  sound  very  nasal 
and  rough,  yet  they  are  uncommonly  powerful,  and  it  is 
very  easy  for  a  speaker  at  a  public  meeting  in  the  open  air 
to  hold  the  careful  attention  of  an  audience  of  several 
thousands  of  people.^  The  Sinhalese  voices,  too,  are 
loud,  harsh,  ill-toned,  and  disagreeable.  Some  of  the  hill 
Veddas  seem  to  have  lost  their  capacity  for  modulating 

i  Man,  /.  c,  p.  389.  -  Schiitt,  /.  c,  p.  116. 

=^  Ellis,  Madag.,  i.  p.  273. 


70  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

their  voices,  "probably  from  disuse".^  In  Tahiti  the 
natives  have  both  good  voices  and  ears,  and  in  addition 
make  very  apt  pupils  in  the  European  music-classes,  but 
their  own  manner  of  singing  was  not  satisfactory  to  the 
Europeans  ;  it  was  monotonous,  the  voices  nasal,  and  full 
of  sudden  transitions  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  notes.- 
In  Australia  it  was  deemed  a  sign  of  speciall}-  great  vocal 
art  to  be  able  to  sustain  the  last  note  for  a  long  time.^ 
This  too  has  not  been  much  altered  by  culture,  the  chief 
change  being  the  trill  which  is  sometimes  sung  on  the  last 
note.  Among  the  Papuans  at  Finchhaven  there  exists  a 
sort  of  "  Meistersinger-school  "  of  the  Middle  Ages,  accord- 
ing to  whose  rules  certain  songs  might  only  be  sung  by 
persons  of  certain  rank.*  Although  it  is  extremely  difficult 
to  reproduce  these  songs  in  our  notation,  Mr.  Schelling 
believes  that  he  has  done  so,  and  he  quotes  eighteen 
different  melodies.      ^Mus.  Ex.  ii.i 

It  is  worthy  of  note  to  what  extent  each  of  the  sexes 
participates  in  the  art  of  singing,  and  what  ideas  half- 
civilised  and  quite  uncivilised  races  have  of  it.  The 
practice  of  music  as  a  profession  stands  high  among  the 
Siamese,  the  loftiest  ambition  of  whose  females  is  to  be 
able  to  perform  the  graceful  movements  and  sing  the 
enchanting  melodies  of  the  Lakhon-pu-ying  or  "  dancing- 
girl,"  who  from  her  youth  up  is  taught  these  arts.  The 
close  of  each  day  is  the  signal  for  the  commencement  of 
music  and  dancmg.  If  one  consider  for  a  moment  how 
much  time  is  given  to  it  daily  by  the  women  whose  almost 
sole  occupation  it  is,  it  may  well  surprise  us  that  the  Siamese 
have  not  attained  greater  proficiency  in  the  art.-''  In  their 
concerts  they  perform  part-songs  in  which  the  women 
sing  the  bass  part.*"     Again,  in  Persia  singing  and  dancing 

1  Le  Mesurier,  /.  c,  p.  340.  -  Wood,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  404. 

^Lumholtz,  /.  c,  p.  156.  ^Schelling,  /.  c. 

'Bowring,  /.  c,  i.  p.  150.  ®  Turpin,  /.  c,  p.  596. 


SINGERS    AND    COMPOSERS    IN    PRIMITIVE    TIMES.        71 

are  considered  infra  dig.,  and  are  left  as  in  almost  all  the 
Orient  to  prostitutes.^ 

In  ancient  Jewish  synagogue  music  it  was  held  that 
female  voices  offered  too  much  physical  attraction,  and 
for  this  reason  the  seats  for  men  and  women  were  separated 
during  divine  service.  In  many  Catholic  dioceses  this 
maxim  has  remained  unto  this  day.  On  Nukahiwa 
(Washington  Islands)  that  part  of  the  dancing  place  on 
which  the  music  was  arranged  was  tabooed  to  the  women.'-^ 
Otherwise  in  primitive  culture  the  women  always  take  a 
prominent  part  in  music  festivals.  The  young  women  of 
the  Yaribs,  who  have  loud  clear  voices,  are  selected  as 
wives  or  concubines  of  the  monarch.  They  lull  the  king 
to  sleep,  play  instruments,  and  whistle  together.  More- 
over, they  are  accustomed  to  pay  court  to  the  men  (as  is 
often  the  case  in  Africa),  the  most  extravagant  encomiums 
being  lavished  on  the  beauty  and  blandishments  of  man- 
kind by  this  gentler  part  of  creation.^  The  women  of  the 
Sudan  are  famous  for  their  singing ;  they  accompany 
themselves  on  the  "  Erbab  ".'^  Gardiner  remarks  of  the 
Zulu  women  that  they  perform  their  parts  with  such  a 
degree  of  sustained  effort  that  a  European  girl  would  be 
compelled  to  go  on  crutches  for  the  remainder  of  her  life 
were  she  to  work  so  assiduously.^  In  Tanga  (East  Africa) 
women  are  the  chief  propagators  of  songs,  of  which  some 
know  an  incredibly  great  number.*"  In  Madagascar  the 
female  voice  is  usually  much  more  suitable  for  training 
than  the  male,  and  the  women  sing  much  more  frequently.''^ 
On  Hervey  Island  (Friendly  Isles)  the  women  often  amused 
Cook  with  their  songs.  Their  voices  were  very  extensive 
in  compass,  and  their  music  as  well  as  their  voices  sounded 


1  Delia  Valle,  /.  c,  pp.  ig,  203,  225.  -  Langsdorf,  /.  c,  p.  164. 

^  Lander,  Rec.  of  Clapp.,  i.  p.  291  ;  ii.  p.  197. 

-•Lyon,  /.  c,  p.  161.  ^  A.  F.  Gardiner,  /.  c,  p.  58. 

^  Baumann,  Usutnbara,  p.  51.  ''  Ellis,  Madag.,  p.  274. 


72  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

very  harmonious.^  They  accompanied  themselves  while 
singing  by  snapping  their  iingers.  The  Kanaka  women 
in  Honolulu  have  wild,  shrill  voices  like  those  of  the 
peasants  in  South  Germany,-  but  they  often  sing  and  are 
always  willing  to  do  so. 

By  far  the  greater  number  of  Japanese  songs  are  sung  by 
girls ;  men  would  make  themselves  ridiculous  by  singing,  j  ust 
as  they  would  never  dance  with  their  ladies  in  an  evening 
party. ^  That  in  New  Zealand  the  women  write  poetry, 
and  probably  also  compose  (as  music  and  poetry  are  there 
so  bound  up  together),  we  have  already  stated.  The 
greater  part  of  those  Chinook  songs  (North  America)  that 
Mr.  Boas  collected  was  composed  by  women.  The  com- 
poser either  invented  a  new  tune  to  each  song  or  used  old 
well-known  tunes.'*  The  Nishinam  women  (Indians) 
have  a  sort  of  musical  contest  which  is  won  by  the  woman 
who  sings  loudest  and  longest.^  Barbarian  as  it  may 
appear  to  be,  such  performances  are  still  in  use  in  z\merica, 
the  modern  counterpart  being  the  "  musical  "  contest  which 
took  place  at  Ruber's  Museum,  New  York,  on  the  23rd 
October,  1892.  We  are  told  the  condition  was  that  there 
should  be  no  stop  of  an}-  sort  in  the  performance,  so  that 
from  time  to  time  each  competitor  had  to  be  fed  with  a 
spoon,  and  both,  it  seems,  drank  beer.  They  started  at 
9  A.M.  on  the  23rd,  and  at  i'52  a.m.  on  the  24th  the  lady 
was  "knocked  out,"  her  hands  falling  to  her  lap  after 
sixteen  hours  fifty-two  minutes  of  pianoforte  pounding. 
The  gentleman  went  on  for  eight  minutes  more,  when  he 
too  stopped,  his  thumbs  then  being  twice  their  usual  size, 
while  the  lady's  right  wrist  was  swollen,  the  finger  tips 

^  Cook,  Second  Voyage,  p.  220.  -  Buchner,  Ocean,  p.  399. 

^v.  Holtz,  /.  c.,  p.  13,  mus.  examples;  other  Jap.  songs,  as  taught 
in  schools,  quoted  by  Fr.  Eckert,  /.  c,  pp.  422-428. 

^  Boas,  Chinook  Song,  I.  c,  p.  224;  with  mus.  examples:  Ponka  and 
Omaha  songs,  quoted  by  Fletscher,  /.  c,  p.  225  ;  Dorsey,  /.  c,  p.  271. 

^Powers,  /.  c,  p.  326. 


SINGERS    AND    COMPOSERS    IN    PRIMITIVE    TIMES.         "J^ 

were  blistered,  and  she  was  very  sleepy.  Both  performers 
talked  freely  to  the  people  while  they  played,  and  Miss 
Melville  received  no  fewer  than  three  proposals  of  marriage 
within  the  first  seven  hours,  besides  two  more  before  she 
stopped  playing.^ 

Among  the  Apache  Indians  the  women  dance  and 
sing ;  ^  the  Sainacneca  in  Chili,  too,  is  performed  onl}-  by 
women,  as  is  the  music  which  accompanies  it.-^  On  Buru 
Island  (between  Celebes  and  Papua),  on  the  other  hand, 
the  woman's  part  is  very  small.  Mr.  Forbes  tells  us  of  a 
musical  performance  where  the  men  sang  an  improvised 
song  to  the  accompaniments  of  the  native  Tifa  (drum), 
and  they  amused  themselves  royally,  laughing  heartily 
at  their  own  improvised  conceits.  But  the  women  sat 
around  on  stones,  taking  no  part  in  the  proceedings, 
resting  their  heads  on  their  arms,  elbows  on  their  knees, 
and  looked  like  veritable  automata.^  On  the  Marianna 
island  Radack,  Chamisso  heard  a  song  by  women  only.^ 
The  song  of  the  Botocudo  (Amazon)  men  resembles  an 
inarticulate  war-cry  ;  the  women,  however,  sing  less  un- 
pleasantly, but  only  a  few  notes,  which  they  constantly 
repeat.'^ 

In  the  playing  of  instruments  too  women  sometimes 
hold  a  peculiar  position.  Among  the  Mississippi  negroes 
the  girls  play  upon  a  brass  tube  several  feet  long,  from 
which  many  of  them  produce  excellent  tones,  and  some- 
times even  complete  melodies.^  The  Papuans  have  two 
kinds  of  flutes  of  which  only  one  may  be  played  by  women.^ 
The  Karagwe  tribes  in  Africa  make  the  women  beat  their 

^  Daily  News,  igth  Nov.,  1892.  -  Schwatka,  I.  c,  p.  51. 

■'V\'ilkes,  /.  c,  i.  p.  171.  '' H.  O.  Forbes,  /.  c. ,  p.  399. 

^The  words  run  as  follows  (Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  67):  "  Untertauchen  in 
die  See  sechs  Mai.  Auftauchen  aus  der  vSee  sechs  Mai.  Sieben  Mai." 
Simmel  says  of  this  song  [1.  c,  p.  284) :  "  In  Radack  the  women  sing  even 
songs  that  deal  with  war  and  navigation  "  (?). 

"Wied-Neuwied,  abstract,  vol.  Ixi.  p.  155.  '  Busch,  /.  t.,  p.  260. 

**  Schelling,  /.  c. 


74  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

war-drums,^  and  the  Radack  women  go  in  the  rear  of 
battle  beating  their  drums  at  the  command  of  the  leader  ;  '^ 
in  times  of  peace  too  the  drum,  which  always  arouses  their 
joy,  is  to  be  found  in  the  women's  hands.^  In  New  Guinea 
and  New  Britain  several  instruments  are  played  by  women 
only,  as  the  pangolo,  a  bow  with  a  string,"'  and  the  wuwu 
( =  wind,  air),  a  globular  fruit  with  four  holes,  one  of  which 
is  blown  into  while  the  others  are  fingered.  (Since  1884 
it  is  out  of  *use,^)  The  Tongala-up,  a  stick  with  a  string 
whirled  in  the  air,  is  played  by  women  and  children.*^  The 
large  heavy  wooden  drums,  however,  called  angramut,  are 
tabooed  for  the  women.  While  manufacturing  it,  the  men 
are  not  allowed  to  call  on  women."  The  Australians 
allow  themselves  to  be  drawn  into  all  sorts  of  passionate 
actions  by  the  music  of  the  women.^  Four  or  five  old 
women  can  stir  up  thirty  or  forty  men  to  commit  any 
bloody  deed  ;  '^  they  also  have  mourning-songs  which  they 
alone  sing,  while  men  only  perform  the  war-songs. 

Wallace  when  voyaging  up  the  Amazon  found  a  tribe, 
the  women  of  which  were  not  allowed  even  to  look  upon 
a  certain  instrument  on  pain  of  death. ^*^  In  Ceylon  the 
women  of  a  family  sit  the  whole  day  long  round  a  timbrel 
(Rabani),  and  from  it  produce  a  monotonous  but  most 
agreeable  sound,  by  drumming  with  their  fingers. ^^ 

With  the  Finnish  Laplanders  marriageable  girls  are 
not  allowed  to  touch  a  certain  drum.^-  The  chief  instru- 
ment of  Japanese  young  ladies  of  "quality"  is  the  guitar 
(Samsic),  and  this  they  take  to.  every  entertainment,  where 
they  play  upon  it  one  after  the  other,  and  sing.  So  it 
seems  that  in  Japan,  too,  the  poor  guests  have  their 
musical  troubles. 

I  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  447.  -  Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  ii8. 

'^ Ibid.,  p.  119.  '*Finsch,  Erfahrg.  S'tidscc,  iii.  2,  p.  112. 

'"Ibid.,  p.  no.  ^Ibid.,  p.  117. 

'^ Ibid.,  p.  III.  ^Gerland,  /.  c,  vi.  pp.  747,  775. 

**  Grey,  Austr.,  p.  303.  ^^  Wallace,  Aniaz.,  pp.  348-49. 

II  Tennent,  /.  c. ,  i.  p.  88,  note  i.  ^'-  Schefferus,  /.  c,  p.  53. 


SINGERS    AND    COMPOSERS    IN    PRIMITIVE    TIMES.        75 

The  part  taken  by  women  in  music  and  song  among 
primitive  people  is  therefore  a  fairly  large  and  exceptional 
one,  more  especially  because  of  the  intimate  relation- 
ship between  music  and  dancing,  to  which  the  women 
are  everywhere  passionately  devoted.  For  this  reason  I 
purpose  speaking  in  a  later  chapter  ("  Music  and  Dancing  ") 
of  the  part  which  woman  plays  in  primitive  music. 

In  some  places  the  children,  separated  from  the  adults, 
sing  choruses  among  themselves,  and  under  certain  cir- 
cumstances they  are  the  chief  support  of  the  practice  of 
singing.  On  Hawaii  Ellis  found  boys  and  girls  singing 
in  chorus,  with  an  accompaniment  of  seven  drums,  a  song 
in  honour  of  a  quondam  celebrated  chief.  Even  during 
supper  with  the  Governor  table-music  was  performed  by 
a  juvenile  bard  of  some  twelve  or  fourteen  summers,  who 
sang  a  monotonous  song  to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
small   drum.^ 

The  men  do  not  everywhere  take  part  in  the  musical 
performances.  In  Fiji  a  man  of  position  deems  it  beneath 
him  to  sing,  and  he  leaves  it  to  his  wives  and  children,  so 
that  women  sing  with  women  only,  and  children  with 
children."'  On  the  other  hand,  on  the  Andaman  Islands 
as  a  rule  onl}-  the  men  sing,  the  women  contenting  them- 
selves with  beating  time,^  and  among  the  Thlinkcets 
(Indians)  the  men  dance  while  the  women  sing.*  Among 
the  Greenlanders  men  drum  and  sing  all  day  long,  women 
only  at  dancing  parties.^ 

It  has  frequently  been  observed  that  the  male  singers 
sing  so  unusually  high,  as  do  the  w^omen  at  times,  but  in 
the  former  case  it  is  much  more  surprising  when  compared 
with  civilised  races.     In  Abyssinia,^  in  Madagascar,^  among 

'  Ellis,  Hawaii,  pp.  74,  75.  -  Gerland,  /.  c,  vi.  p.  C04. 

■*  Jagor,  Aiidain.,  p.  45;  Portman,  /.  c,  p.  196. 
*  Bancroft,  i.  p.  112  ;  Langsdorf,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  114. 
^Graah,  /.  c,  p.  85.  ®  Lobo,  p.  27. 

"  Pfeiffer,  Madag.,  pp.  185-186. 


76  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

the  Maoris/  the  song  is  pitched  as  high  as  possible  and 
performed  amid  the  greatest  excitement.  In  a  troop  of 
Sudanese  soldiers  who  once  visited  Europe  the  frequency 
of  high  tenor  and  bass  voices  was  striking.-  All  up  the 
Niger  and  its  tributaries  the  prevailing  voice  among  men 
seems  to  be  high  baritone,  and  among  women  contralto.-^ 
Among  the  male  voices  in  a  Hottentot  chorus  not  a  single 
baritone  was  heard ;  every  one  sang  tenor,  somewhat 
hoarsely  it  is  true,  but  not  unpleasantly.*  The  men  in 
Samoa,  who  have  exceptionally  good  voices,  sing  a 
second  tenor  part.^  The  Tasmanians,  too,  used  to  sing 
tenor.*^  With  the  Andamanese  "falsetto"  is  common 
among  both  sexes,  though  their  general  "timbre"  is  not 
as  nasal  as  that  of  more  civilised  Oriental  races.  The 
usual  compass  of  the  voice  in  both  sexes  of  the  "  Onge  " 
tribes  is  about  an  octave,  the  prevailing  male  voice  being 
baritone,  the  prevailing  female  voice  being  contralto.  All 
the  notes  of  the  women  are  distinctly  head,  not  chest 
notes. ^  Among  the  Nahua  nation  (North  America)  bass 
singers  were  rare,  and  were  prized  in  proportion  to  their 
rarity.^  As  a  rule,  however,  the  compass  of  Indian  male 
voices  is  almost  identical  with  that  of  the  whites,  and 
there  was  not  one  who  was  unable  to  sing  tenor  F  easily, 
while  the  average  compass  was  two  octaves,  F-f  or  A-a. 
Their  voices  are  pleasant,  but  when  the  Spaniards  first 
went  to  America  they  said  the  Indian  voices  sounded 
somewhat  rough,  but  that  they  improved  immensely  under 
careful  tuition.'' 

With  these  facts  some  interesting  conclusions  have 
been  connected.  Mr.  Berg  ^'^  imagines  that  the  male 
voice  was  formerly  higher  than  now,  and  that  this  is  only 

1  Wood,  /.  c-.,  p.  162.  -  Zollner,  p.  447. 

'^Da.y,  Niger,  p.  2y 2.  *  Michaelis, /.  t:.,  p.  527. 

5  Wilkes,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  77.  «  Bonwick,  /.  c,  p.  32. 

'■Portman,  I.e.,  p.  183.  » Bancroft,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  294. 

« Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  16.  i»-Berg,  /.  e.,  pp.  18,  19. 


SINGERS    AND    COMPOSERS    IN    PRIMITIVE    TIMES.         // 

the  phvlogenetic  analogy  to  the  ontogenetic  fact  that  our 
boys  also  have  at  first  high  voices  which  acquire  the 
deeper  tones  of  a  man  after  the  mutation.  But  with  this 
the  tenor  voice  of  a  few  primitive  people  obviously  has 
nothing  to  do,  for  if  the  higher  voices  of  savages  should 
be  analogous  to  boys'  voices  they  ought  to  have  female 
voices,  for  in  this  consist  the  characteristics  of  the 
mutation  in  falling  directly  from  the  female  "timbre" 
into  the  male  one,  from  the  soprano  or  alto  to  bass  or 
tenor,  instead  of  gradually  sinking  from  soprano  to  alto 
and  then  to  tenor  or  bass.  This  hypothesis,  however, 
that  savage  races  had  female  voices,  would  be  entirely 
unfounded,  although  some  singular  exceptions  speak  in 
favour  of  it  at  first  sight.  Thus  the  Australians  frequentlv 
sing  in  falsetto  and  use  a  sort  of  tremolo  ;  ^  the  Chinese 
sing  and  speak  in  descant  -  during  theatrical  performances  ; 
those  who  play  women's  parts  must  therefore  pitch  their 
voices  considerably  higher.  The  women  of  the  Kam- 
chadales  have  an  astonishingly  hollow  and  thin  voice  "  in 
speaking".  According  to  Mr.  Erman  this  is  due  to  their 
small  stunted  snub  noses.^  The  Kafirs  sing  in  falsetto,"* 
as  do  the  natives  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  and,  moreover,  as 
Wilkes  says  the  latter  "  sing  continually  when  speaking," 
I  imagine  they  must  also  speak  in  falsetto.  But  Mr. 
Bridge,  who  lived  many  years  among  them,  makes  no 
mention  of  this  ;  although  it  is  well  known  that  when  con- 
versing with  each  other  they  do  so  in  whispers  (possibly 
this  points  to  a  falsetto  voice),  Mr.  Foster  simply  mentions 
their  "soft  melodious  voice  ".^  This  example  is  there- 
fore not  certain  enough  to  warrant  an  acceptance  of  the 
idea  that  the  male  of  primitive  people  have  female  voices ; 
in  all  other  mentioned  cases  this  particular  tone-colour,, 
so  to  speak,  is  only  used  when  singing,  or,  as  in  China,  at 

1  Curr,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  170.  -  Gortz,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  59. 

2  Erman,  /.  c,  vol.  i.  3,  p.  209.  'Shooter,  /.  c,  p.  237. 
=  Foster,  /.  c,  i.  p.  180. 


78  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

the  play  ;  they  have,  then,  male  voices  and  screw  them 
up  to  a  high  pitch  only  on  special  occasions.  As  thev 
become  much  more  excited  over  singing  than  we,  so  they 
are  able  to  pitch  their  voices  with  more  ease  in  the  higher 
registers,  in  which  also  they  can  continue  singing  freely 
in  spite  of  the  great  exertion,  because  they  have  neither 
to  preserve  nor  train  their  voices.  Even  the  ordinary 
conversations  of  primitive  people  are  carried  on  with  the 
greatest  excitement,  a  fact  which  led  so  many  travellers 
falsely  to  believe  they  were  discussing  very  important 
intelligence,  the  natural  consequence  of  this  too  being 
high-pitched  voices.^  Taking  this  into  consideration  I 
would  neither  share  Mr.  Stumpfs  more  reasonable  pre- 
sumption that  the  male  voice  in  general  was  higher 
originally  than  now,  in  its  entirety.-  When  he  alleged 
that  the  old-time  tenor  parts,  e.g.,  those  in  the  St. 
Matthew-Passion,  were  written  so  high,  that  therefore  the 
tenors  of  Bach's  day  were  better  than  those  we  have  now 
as  far  as  compass  of  voice  is  concerned,  it  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  Bach  wrote  for  a  lower  pitch  than  that  now 
in  use,  as  Ellis  has  shown. ^  Moreover,  the  space  of  time 
which  has  elapsed  since  Bach's  death  is  much  too  short 
to  have  effected  so  important  a  difference  in  the  human 
voice.  It  can  rather  be  said  that  we  have  a  natural 
tendency  to  constantly  raise  the  pitch.  In  favour  of  this 
is  the  fact  that  theatre  and  concert  pitch  is  always  being 
lowered  artificially  and  forcibly  at  many  of  the  congresses  ; 

1  Thomson,  Heart  of  Africa,  p.  43. 
-  Stumpf,  Tonpsych.,  i.  p.  340. 

2  Ellis,  Hist,  of  Mtis. -pitch,  p.  305.  This  low  pitch  of  Bach's  explains 
to  me  why  he  always  wrote  the  trumpet  part  so  high  that  our  players  are 
scarcely  able  to  play  it.  Consequently  it  has  unnecessarily  been  supposed 
that  the  art  of  trumpet-playing  has  decreased  in  quality  in  course  of  time. 
High  tones,  however,  can  more  easily  be  played  on  trumpets  of  lower  than 
of  higher  pitch,  and  as  the  pitch  called  B  flat  was  actually  lower  at  Bach's 
time  than  to-day,  our  players  are  naturally  at  a  disadvantage  compared  with 
their  colleagues  in  the  seventeenth  century. 


SINGERS    AND    COMPOSERS    IN    PRIMITIVE    TIMES.        79 

also,  that  in  tuning  several  strings  each  higher  than  the 
preceding,  and  not  each  according  to  the  first,  we  invariably 
err  towards  raising  the  pitch. ^  Nevertheless  Ellis's  his- 
torically arranged  tables  of  comparison  of  different  pitches 
show  a  certain  fluctuation  both  upwards  and  downwards. 
For  my  part  I  venture  to  say  that  in  consequence  of  the 
constant  training  and  selecting  of  good  voices,  in  course 
of  time  high  tenors  and  sopranos  as  well  as  deep  basses  and 
altos  are  more  frequently  found  ;  at  any  rate  the  demands 
of  modern  composers  have  become  much  greater,  and  the 
number  of  both  male  and  female  singers  incomparably  so. 
The  number  of  choral  societies  and  theatres  will  corrobo- 
rate this ;  what  is  not  required  of  these  to-day,  and  what 
has  not  been  overcome  in  course  of  the  past  fifty  years  ! 
So  it  appears  to  me  that  progress  and  development  in  this 
particular  line  are  in  every  way  remarkable.  It  is  with 
the  vocal  organs  as  with  those  of  hearing ;  there  has  been 
practically  no  change  in  historic  times  at  any  rate,  although 
to-day  we  may  perhaps  be  better  able  to  realise  their 
capabilities  than  heretofore. 

1  Stumpf,  Tonpsych.,  i.  p.  303. 


CHAPTER  III 


INSTRUMENTS. 


(a)  GENERAL  REMARKS. 

The  use  of  instruments  in  the  first  development  of  music 
(phylogenetically  and  ontogenetically)  furnished  the  neces- 
sary hold  and  the  equally  necessary  definiteness  for  the 
melodic  frame-work.  Further  than  this,  however,  the  use 
of  instruments  does  not  seem  to  go,  all  subsequent  develop- 
ment proceeding  from  vocal  music.  But  in  earliest  times 
it  required  whole  centuries  before  all  the  capabilities  of 
even  the  most  simple  and  primitive  instruments  were 
completely  understood  and  made  use  of.  Possibly  this 
may  in  some  degree  account  for  the  surprising  antiquity 
of  many  comparatively  complicated  instruments,  the  full 
appropriate  use  of  which  would  otherwase  be  quite  incom- 
prehensible.^ Concerning  this  antiquity  the  following 
archaeological  discoveries  furnish  the  desired  explanation  : 
At  a  meeting  of  the  Archaeological  Institute  (3rd  June, 
1864)  the  Earl  of  Dunraven  exhibited  the  bone  of  an 
animal  of  which  the  original  use  was  at  that  time  unknown. 
The  report  of  the  A  rchceological  Journal  states  ^  that  it  was 
thought  to  have  formed  part  of  a  musical  instrument  or  a 

1  In  the  following  chapter  I  wish  to  call  attention  to  the  names  of 
instruments  (primitive  and  modern),  the  sound  of  which  sometimes  imitates 
the  sound  of  the  instruments  ;  compare  flute,  pipe  (the  German  Pfiff),  tube, 
tam-tam,  gong,  rattle,  drum.  Only  later  such  names  were  given  to  other 
objects  of  similar  form  but  different  use,  e.g.,  chibouk,  originally  a  herdman's 
pipe  or  flute  in  Central  Asia.  Compare  the  rich  collection  of  examples  in 
Tylor's  Priniit.  Cult.,  i.  p.  i88  scq. 

-  Archceolog.  jfoiini.,  1864,  p.  190. 
(80) 


INSTRUMENTS.  8l 

crossbow.  It  was  found  in  Ireland  in  a  moat  at  Desmond 
Castle.  Professor  Owen  pronounced  the  material  to  be  a 
bone  of  the  Irish  elk  (cervus  alces)  ;  from  this  others  drew 
further  conclusions  and  declared  the  bone  to  be  the  remains 
of  an  "Irish  l}ra  ".  This  last  hypothesis  is  somewhat 
hazardous,  but  not  at  all  because  of  the  improbability  that 
at  the  time  of  the  Irish  elk  there  were  instruments  which 
could  be  used  for  musical  purposes.  On  the  contrary, 
this  latter  presumption  has  been  made  more  probable 
through  further  discoveries  of  a  less  hypothetical  nature. 
Among  the  relics  of  the  Troglodytes  of  the  Dordogne 
valley  was  a  reindeer  bone  pierced  at  one  end  by  an 
oblique  hole,  reaching  to  the  medullary  canal.  It  was 
possible  to  produce  a  shrill  sound  from  it  by  blowing  as 
one  would  a  hollow  key.^  Paul  Broca  called  this  instru- 
ment a  "rallying  whistle,"  but  it  is  questionable  if  this  is 
a  correct  definition ;  '^  still  other  and  more  complicated 
instruments  have  been  found  which  give  more  definite 
evidence  of  their  being  used  for  a  musical  purpose.  M. 
E.  Pietto  in  1871  found  in  the  cavern  at  Gourdan  (Haute- 
Garonne),  in  a  layer  of  charcoal  and  cinders  mixed  with 
flint  implements,  an  instrument  which  he  called  a  neolithic 
flute  made  of  a  bone  and  pierced  with  holes  (it  is  not 
stated  how  many)  at  the  side.  Wilson  considers  this 
discovery  to  be  an  undoubted  example  of  the  very  earliest 
musical  practice.^  Mr.  Fetis,*  too,  mentions  and  gives  a 
diagram  of  a  flute  of  stag-horn  (found  near  Poitiers),  which, 

^  The  first  of  these  reindeer  whistles  was  found,  according  to  Christy 
and  Lartet  [I.  c,  p.  48),  in  i860  in  a  grave  in  Aurignac.  Since  then  so 
many  similar  whistles  have  been  found  that  they  are  by  no  means  rare 
specimens  in  our  ethnological  collections. 

-  Lartet  is  of  opinion  that  this  is  a  hunting  whistle.  Besides  there  are 
other  similar  pieces  of  bone  which  also  emit  a  shrill  tone,  but  which,  accord- 
ing to  Ch.  Lyell  (/.  c,  p.  128),  were  pierced  with  holes  for  the  mere  purpose 
of  being  strung  over  the  arm  and  so  used  as  ornaments.  Comp.  C.  Engel, 
Descript.  Catal.,  South  Kens.  Miis.,  I.  c,  p.  10. 

3  D.  Wilson,  /.  c,  i.  p.  41.  -^Fetis,  Hist.  Gen.,  i.  p.  26. 

6 


02  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

judging  from  the  surroundings  in  which  it  was  found, 
has  been  supposed  to  date  from  the  stone  period.  It 
had  three  holes  bored  at  equal  distances,  thus  producing 
four  diatonic  tones.  Another  instrument  is  a  sort  of  rule 
or  paper-knife  made  from  a  light  greyish  green  nephrite 
spread  over  with  brown  colour,  wonderfully  polished,  i8'4 
cm.  long,  1-8  cm.  broad  in  the  middle,  y^  mm.  thick, 
tapering  towards  the  ends  and  somewhat  thinner  at  the 
sides.  The  broader  sides  are  quite  smooth  and  shining, 
while  the  ends  and  edges  are  rounded  off.  In  the  middle 
of  one  of  the  narrower  sides  is  a  small  round  "  relief"  with 
flat  rounded  inlets,  which  is  pierced  with  two  holes,  the 
one  slightly  larger  than  the  other,  but  both  bored  conically 
from  each  side  so  that  the  middle  is  the  narrowest  part, 
(It  came  from  Tocuyo,  west  of  Valencia,  in  Venezuela.) 
It  was  obviously  hung  up  on  a  string  drawn  through  the 
two  holes,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  it  was  struck  upon 
great  functions,  i.e.,  that  it  was  a  sort  of  musical  instru- 
ment, for  it  emitted  a  powerful,  high-pitched  tone  when 
struck.     It  was  similar  to  an  East  Asiatic  gong,^ 

Of  later  date  is  a  bronze  tube  found  in  a  ra\ine  in 
Schleswig  ;  it  lay  beneath  a  pile  of  gold  and  silver  orna- 
ments and  emitted  a  deep  note.  The  specimen  is  now  in 
the  museum  at  Copenhagan.- 

Though  the  fact  is  sufficiently  remarkable  that  musical 
instruments  were  first  made  at  a  time  when  the  artistic 
capabilities  of  mankind  were  confined  to  working  in  stone 
or  in  animals'  bones,  yet  the  boldest  hypotheses  of  musi- 
cians have  been  surpassed  by  the  existence  of  ancient 
Egyptian  flutes  which  were  brought  to  London  in  iSgo, 
and  which,  to  the  astonishment  of  all,  produced  the 
diatonic  scale.  From  the  surroundings  in  which  they 
were  found  it  was  thought  they  dated  from  3000  years 
B.C.  (i.e.,  the   Egyptian  bronze    period).     Thus   the   flute 

1  D.  Wilsorij  /.  c,  i.  p.  41.  -  Fetis,  Hist.  Gen.,  i.  p.  26. 


INSTRUMENTS.  83 

and  fife  are,  with  the  gong,  the  most  ancient  instruments 
so  far  as  can  be  definitely  ascertained.  Sounding  plates 
(like  gongs),  however,  are  proved  by  their  very  polish  to 
belong  to  a  somewhat  later  period.  (Lubbock's  Period  of 
Polished  Stones.) 

It  is  also  remarkable  that  even  to-day  there  exist 
people  who  use  the  same  materials  and  principles  in 
making  their  instruments.  Flutes  and  fifes  made  from 
the  bones  of  animals  or  wings  of  a  bird  are  not  uncommon. 
The  Caribs  in  Guiana  use  the  bones  of  the  jaguar  for 
this  purpose.  Wood  says  ^  they  formerly  used  human 
bones.  This  remark  of  Wood  is,  I  am  sorry  to  say, 
incorrect  ;  the  truth  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  just  the 
opposite.  Formerly  jaguar  bones  were  used,  but  as  these 
became  scarce,  human  bones  were  brought  into  requisi- 
tion, and  they  still  are  used.-  The  jaguar  flute  has  three 
holes  like  that  mentioned  by  Fetis,  but  Mr.  Im  Thurn 
unfortunately  does  not  give  the  notes.  Flutes  made  from 
human  bones  are  also  found  in  New  Zealand,^  among  the 
Surinam  in  Guiana  "*  who  use  the  bones  of  slain  enemies 
for  this  purpose,  and  among  the  Indians  of  Columbia  River '' 
who  use  animals'  bones. 

Even  the  human  skull  is  used  as  a  musical  instrument 
— as  a  rattle  (on  the  Fly  River  in  New  Guinea).  Its 
construction  is  as  follows  :  The  cleansed  skull  is  covered 
with  a  wax  mask  stained  wdth  the  red  juice  of  the  Arbits 
precatorius  and  rattan  stripes.  The  eyes  are  replaced  by 
cowry-shells,  and  to  the  temples  are  fastened  ear  pendants 
as  the  natives  wear  them.  The  lower  jaw  is  bound  to 
the  upper,  and  the  whole  skull  tied  up  with  a  thong  and 
filled  with  stones,  hard  kernels  of  fruit,  and  pumice-stone, 

1  Wood,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  630.  -  Im  Thurn,  /.  c,  p.  309. 

*  Angas,  Savage  Life,  p.  529  ;  Polyn.,  p.  158. 

*  Stedmann,  I.  c,  i.  p.  409. 

5  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  201  ;  Jewitt,  /.  c,  p.  88,  mentions  the  flute  from 
animal  bones  as  a  general  Indian  instrument. 


84  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

occasionally  serves  for  a  sort  of  rattle  during  a  dance. 
On  Eremitanos  Island  near  New  Guinea,  the  lower  jaw, 
hair,  and  teeth  are  fastened  to  a  frame  of  bast  in  the  shape 
of  a  horse-shoe  and  hung  up  on  the  houses.^ 

Ethnological  inquiries,  and  more  especiall}-  archaeo- 
logical discoveries,  have  destroyed  a  hitherto  generally 
accepted  theory  that  the  drum  is  the  oldest,  and  the  stringed 
instrument  (of  whatever  name)  the  most  recent  of  musical 
instruments.-  The  most  ancient  is  the  tiute.  The  division 
into  instruments  of  percussion,  wind,  and  strings  helps 
nothing  in  deciding  their  origin,  although  it  may  be  the 
most  useful  in  connection  with  the  modern  orchestra.  The 
reasons  which  speak  against  it  are  manifold  and  are  all 
specially  opposed  to  Rowbotham's  theory,  which  assumes 
not  only  three  different  types  of  instruments,  but  also  a 
corresponding  development  of  music  itself. 

I.  The  most  ancient  discoveries  (from  the  N'outh  of 
mankind)  of  flutes  and  pipes,  but  not  of  drums,  are  definite 
facts  which  no  speculation  can  put  aside.  The  early 
appearance  of  the  bow  (as  a  stringed  instrument)  among 
the  Damaras  and  Hottentots  also  declares  against  the 
theory  that  we  are  indebted  to  a  much  later  period  for 
stringed  instruments.  Rowbotham,  however,  makes  light 
of  this  fact,  and  designates  the  Hottentot  bow  a  "  mere 
idle  experiment,"  and  behold  his  theory  is  saved.  I  am 
rather  inclined  to  believe  that  Mr.  Wagener  was  correct  in 
saying  that  a  wind  instrument  was  undoubtedly  the  first.^ 
He  mentions  especiall}-  the  bamboo  tube,  while  the  above- 
mentioned  discoveries  decide  in  favour  of  the  bone  whistle 
and  flute.  Folklore  in  Ja\a,  too,  states  that  the  origin 
of  music  is  due  to  accident,  that  the  wind  blew  through  a 
suspended  tube  and  produced  a  musical  tone.* 

^  Andree,  Etiiii.  Par.,  p.  139;  similar  description  by  Albertis,  ii.  p.  379. 
-I  need  scarcely  quote  any  authors  as  the  supposition  is  a  general  one. 
•'  \\'agener,  /.  c,  p.  48. 
'  Raffles,  /.  c,  p.  472. 


INSTRUMENTS.  85 

Carl  Engel  (Auc.  Nat.,  p.  10)  considers  the  drum  the 
most  ancient  instrument.  But  when  he  sa\'s  we  find 
drums  earher  than  any  other  instrument  his  statement  is 
opposed  to  all  discoveries  of  prehistoric  remains.  I  can 
find  nothing  but  speculative  reasons  and  common  consent 
for  the  drum  being  the  most  ancient  instrument. 

2.  The  existence  of  combination  instruments  in  primi- 
tive periods  and  their  importance  makes  the  above- 
mentioned  division  utterly  impossible,  unless  we  simply 
pass  over  these  facts.  I  mention  the  goura  as  a  combina- 
tion of  wind  and  stringed  instrument,  the  marimba  as  a 
combination  of  wind  and  percussion  instrument,  and  the 
Jew's  harp  as  a  wdnd  instrument  combined  with  the 
principles  of  the  vibrating  string,  i.e.,  principle  of  stringed 
instruments.^ 

3.  As  a  rule  the  simplicity  of  construction  of  a  drum 
as  opposed  to  the  complexity  of  stringed  instruments  is 
held  out  as  a  reason  for  its  being  the  most  primitive  instru- 
ment. If  this  be  sound  reasoning,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
drum  cannot  be  the  most  ancient  instrument.  Compare 
existing  illustrations  of  primitive  instruments  and  }-ou  will 
see  that  the  primitive  bow  (or  guitar  or  zither,  lyre  or 
harp,  or  whatever  you  may  call  it)  is  the  simplest,  the 
fiute  and  tube  coming  next,  while  the  drum — in  ancient 
days  not  rarely  a  richly  ornamented  work  of  art — is  the 
most  complicated.  A  simple  bow  or  a  primitive  harp  or 
zither  (just  as  used  in  primitive  times)  any  one  of  us  could 
construct ;  every  shepherd  boy  cuts  his  flute  in  a  few 
moments — but  a  drum,  especially  such  a  one  as  is  in  use 
among  savages,  made  of  a  hollowed-out  tree  trunk,  would 
take  days  to  make  with  the  aid  of  several  practised  hands 
and  appropriate  implements.  Nevertheless,  on  this  basis 
Mr.  Rowbotham  builds  up  his  theory  of  the  three  periods, 
drum,  pipe,  and  lyre  stages  which  should  correspond  with 

1  The  mere  name  is  characteristic  enough:  the  Germans  sa}'  "  Maul- 
troiiiiiu'l,"  the  English  Jew's  harp. 


86  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

the  stone,  bronze,  and  iron  ages,  and  as  the  stone  and 
bronze  were  replaced  by  the  iron,  so  must  the  drum  and 
flute  be  b}-  stringed  instruments.  This  seems  to  me  a 
most  unfortunate  and  unnecessary  theory,  as  such  distinct 
periods  of  musical  instruments  never  existed,  and  the  drum 
has  held  its  own  up  to  the  date  of  the  modern  orchestra 
quite  contrary  to  the  part  played  by  stone  and  bronze. 

4.  The  above  classification,  further,  is  impossible,  on 
the  ground  that  it  must  not  be  made  according  to  the 
mere  appearance  of  the  instruments  and  the  use  to  which 
we  think  they  would  have  been  put,  but  rather  to  that  to 
which  the  savages  have  put  them.  The  character  of 
instruments  can  decide  nothing  as  to  the  condition  of 
music.  Again  and  again  may  examples  be  adduced  to 
prove  that  savages  tuned  their  drums  together  by  applying 
pressure  with  the  fingers,  or  by  holding  the  drum  near  a 
fire  ;  drums,  too,  which  produce  a  different  tone  from  each 
end,  and  therefore  are  not  used  merely  as  rhythmical 
instruments,  were  used  in  Guiana.^  On  the  Tonga  Islands 
there  is  a  bamboo  tube  in  use,  which  is  not  blown  but 
beaten  on  the  ground  ;  -  the  same  thing  occurs  in  Samoa, 
too.^  Mr.  Crawfurd  mentions  an  instrument  made  of 
different  tubes  (like  the  pipes  of  an  organ)  which  is  not 
blown  but  shaken  about  in  a  frame.*  The  Kafirs  have  a 
"  fiddle  '■  or  harp  from  which  they  can  produce  no  melody, 
but  merely  one  note.'^  In  Fiji  the  natives  had  flutes  with 
five  openings  of  which  only  one  was  used,^  and  the 
Bechuanas  played  their  reed  pipes  more  for  the  sake  of 
time  than  of  melody.'^  The  Mandingoes  are  said  to  play 
but  one  note  on  their  flutes,  "  nor  would  they  play  better 
if  they  had  European  flutes '"."^     The  ancient  Armenians 

ilm  Thurn,  /.  c,  p.  309.  -  Mariner,  Qunr.  Rev.,  I.  c,  p.  35. 

3  Turner,  Sa7noa,p.  125;  Polyii.,  p.  215. 

■»  Crawfurd,  /.  c,  p.  334.  5  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  232. 

«  Wilkes,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  189.  "  Fritsch,  Eingcb.,  pp.  190-91. 

^Astley  Collect.,  ii.  p.  278. 


INSTRUMENTS.  8/ 

had  a  stringed  instrument  which  they  beat  with  a 
stick} 

Under  the  circumstances,  then,  nothing  of  the  character 
of  music  can  be  argued  from  what  is  known  of  the  instru- 
ments as  such.  But  though  melody  and  harmony  are  the 
most  recent  developments  of  primitive  music,  yet  they  in 
no  way  decide  the  period  at  which  stringed  instruments 
came  into  use.  Drumming,  it  is  true,  was  the  first  attempt 
at  the  practice  of  music,  or  rather  of  time-keeping,  but 
the  dnnn  was  by  no  means  the  first  instrument. 

There  are  a  good  many  savage  tribes  which  perform 
their  music  without  any  instruments  :  thus  the  natives  of 
the  Philippine  Islands  have  no  instruments  ;  -  the  same  is 
said  of  the  aborigines  on  the  Caroline  Islands  in  the  West, 
and  of  Lugunor  and  Kusai.^  Only  in  Ponape  there  is  a 
drum,  flute,  and  shell-trumpet  used  in  war  and  during, 
religious  feasts,*  in  Bornabi  a  nose-flute  and  a  w^ooden 
drum  covered  wath  shark's  skin.^  The  Melanesiens,  too, 
have  no  instruments,  at  least  not  in  the  smallest  islands,^ 
nor  have  the  Veddas  in  Ceylon,^  and  the  natives  in  Tierra 
del  Fuego.  The  Andamanese  know  only  the  sounding 
board  (Pakuda),  on  which  they  beat  time.^  The  Ainu  on 
the  Island  of  Yezo  do  not  themselves  make  any  instru- 
ments ;  those  which  they  use  are  all -introduced  from  Japan.^ 
The  women  beat  time  to  the  dancers  on  empty  coops  and 
accompany  their  songs  with  clapping  their  hands. ^°  The 
Hassanyeh  tribes  on  the  White  Nile  had  no  musical  in- 
struments. Girls  clapping  their  hands  and  singing  a  song,. 
and  young  men  clappingtoo,  although  not  joiningin  the  song, 
was  sufficient  to  excite  the  dancers.     All  kept  good  time.^^ 


1  Peterman,  /.  c,  p.  366.'  "-  Fr.  Miiller,  /.  c,  p.  137. 

'^  Gerland-Waitz,  /.  c,  v.  2,  p.  90.  ^  Meinicke,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  383. 

5  Angas,  Polyn.,  p.  384.  "^  Ratzel,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  228. 

"  Brown,  /.  c,  p.  241.  **  Jagor,  Aitdaiii.,  p.  63  ;  Portman,  /.  c,  p. 

«  Siebold,  Aino,  p.  48.  "  Scheube,  /.  c,  p.  237. 

"  Petherick,  /.  c,  p.  137. 


68  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

The  natives  of  Australia,  too,  had  no  instruments  (except 
at  Ports  Jackson  and  Essington),  and  they  accompany 
their  songs  by  beating  one  arm  against  the  other. ^  At 
Moorunde  (Australia)  the  natives  carried  branches  of 
green  boughs,  which  they  waved  and  shook  to  the  time 
of  the  song.-  Speaking  of  the  Finmark  Laplanders,  Mr. 
Leems  says  they  have  no  musical  instrument.^  Linee, 
however,  found  in  the  hills  of  Lapland  a  sort  of  trumpet 
("  lur  ")  and  pipes  made  of  the  bark  of  the  quicken  tree  or 
mountain  ash  (sorbus  aucuparia).^ 

In  spite  of  their  having  no  instruments  the  above- 
mentioned  tribes  know  songs  and  dances  ;  anything 
making  a  noise  may  be  used  to  accompany  the  per- 
formers. 

Thus  the  negroes  are  said  to  use  everything  for  their 
musical  performance  that  claps  :  wooden  sticks,  tin  boxes 
of  preserved  meat,  ke^-s,  etc.''  Some  tribes  even  use  their 
pans,  such  as  they  have  for  meals,  pierce  holes  round  them 
with  copper  plates  fastened  with  copper  pins."  The 
Indians  use  for  the  same  purpose  mussel  or  cockle  shells 
tied  together  '^  (original  of  the  castanetfe  ?).  When  com- 
mencing an  attack  the  lords  of  "  Tezcuco  "  (Mexico)  struck 
two  bones  together  as  a  "  musical  "  signal.^ 

No  wonder  the  appreciation  of  European  instruments 
in  savage  countries  is  so  different  from  ours.  Burchell's 
flute  did  not  impress  the  Bushmen,  nor  did  the  sound  of 
a  flute  strike  the  Fuegians  in  any  degree.^  On  the 
Tonga  Islands  the  sounds  of  European  drums  excelled  — 
according    to    the    natives — -all    other   music  ;  ^'^   the  high 


^  Salvado,  /.  c,  p.  183.  -  Eyre,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  236. 

■*  Leems,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  452.  ■*  Linnaeus,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  51. 

^  Buchner,  Kani.,  p.  13  ;  Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  617. 

<^Astlcy  Collect.,  iii.  p.  227.  "  Jewitt,  /.  c,  p.  88. 

^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  426.  "  Foster,  i.  p.  180, 

^^  Erskine,  /.  c,  p.  152. 


INSTRUMENTS.  Og 

mentioned  before.^  The  music  of  a  Scotch  bagpipe  once 
considerably  frightened  the  poor  AustraHans;  later  on,  when 
they  saw  that  no  harm  would  come  out  of  it,  they  got  used 
to  the  music,  and  the  performance  met  with  general 
approval.-  In  Hapai  (Tonga)  none  of  the  European 
musical  instruments  which  Cook  brought  with  him  was 
held  in  the  least  esteem  except  the  drum,  and  even  that 
they  did  not  think  equal  to  their  own.  The  French  horns, 
in  particular,  seemed  to  be  held  in  great  contempt.^  At 
Loango  (Africa)  the  natives  often  gather  under  a  tree  to 
hold  concerts  ;  they  use  all  sorts  of  stringed  instruments, 
trumpets,  fifes,  and  drums,  and  mix  their  verses  to  the 
sound  of  instruments.  The  more  noise  is  made  the 
better  the  piece  is  performed.  "  Our  military  musicians 
would  soon  become  new  Orphei,  but  the  best  opera 
musician  would  just  as  soon  be  laughed  at."  *  The  Fulis 
(West  Africa)  love  music,  and  though  the  kings  and  princes 
of  the  neighbouring  Jalofs  think  it  a  disgrace  to  touch  an 
instrument,  yet  some  of  that  rank  among  the  Fulis  pride 
themselves  in  understanding  several.  At  the  same  time 
they  are  extremely  fond  of  dancing.^ 

Mr.  Lander  tells  us  that  in  every  class  of  society  from 
the  monarch  down  to  the  lowest  slave  instrumental  music 
is  in  favour,  and  a  European  fiddler  might  travel  with  ease 
and  comfort  from  Badagry  to  Bornu.  He  would  be  re- 
ceived everywhere  with  open  arms,  lodged  in  palaces,  and 
sumptuously  fed,  although  he  might,  perhaps,  feel  some 
trifling  inconvenience  from  excess  of  kindness.^ 

At  Griqua-Stad,  near  the  conflux  of  the  Vaal  and  Grote 


Mt  may  be  well  to  mention  that  our  "civilised"  population  as  well 
takes  great  delight  in  a  monster  musical  box — the  street  organ. 
-Globus,  xiii.  p.  123. 

'■''  Cook,  First  Voyage,  i.  p.  248;  Pink.  Collect.,  xi.  p.  667. 
■*  Proyart,  /.  c,  p.  575. 
°  Briie,  /.  c,  p.  63(/. 
'^  Lander,  Rcc.  of  Clapp.,  i.  p.  293. 


go  _     PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Rivers  (tributaries  of  the  Orange  River),  the  European 
mouth-harmonica  was  in  particular  favour,  to  the  playing 
of  which  the  swollen  up  lips  of  the  natives  seemed 
especiall}-  fitted.^  Their  extraordinary  feeling  for  time  is 
even  on  such  occasions  unmistakable.  The  natives  on 
Solomon  Islands  were  much  pleased  with  an  imitation  of 
the  boatswain's  call,  and  seemed  to  like  a  German  student 
song  which  the  sailors  sang.^  The  real  boatswain's  call 
so  much  impressed  the  Papuans  that  they  at  once  offered 
a  high  price  in  gold  for  it.'"^ 

(/')  FLUTES,  FIFES,   FLAGEOLETS. 

The  ancient  Greeks  had  a  sensible  saying  about  the 
importance  of  a  reed  :  it  contributed  to  subjugate  nations 
by  furnishing  arrows,  to  soften  men's  manners  by  the 
charm  of  music,  and  to  unfold  their  understanding  by- 
affording  the  first  instruments  for  tracing  letters.  To  this 
Humboldt  remarked  that  these  three  uses  of  reeds  mark 
in  some  sort  three  different  periods  in  the  life  of  nations.* 
However,  the  bone-flute  existed  long  before  the  reed-flute 
and  also  before  the  reed-arrow,  and  to  soften  men's 
manners  primitive  music  with  all  its  flutes  has  contributed 
next  to  nothing ;  on  the  contrary,  it  inspired  the  savages 
with  a  desire  for  fighting,  it  aroused  their  anger,  excited 
their  fanaticism,  and  by  accompanying  their  war-dances, 
also  in  time  of  peace,  it  aroused  their  lust  for  war. 
Among  warlike  nations  music  is  most  developed,  and 
directly  arises  from  an  excess  of  vigour  which  is  to  be 
trained  and  strengthened  for  the  struggle  for  life.  This 
saying  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  and  still  more  Humboldt's 
attempt  to  divide  the  life  of  nations  into  three  periods,  is 

1  Fritsch,  Dif  Eiiig.,  p.  190  ;  3  yalirc  in  Sad.  Afr.,  252. 
^Zimmermann,  /.  c,  i.  p.  239. 
^Ibid.,  ii.  p.  186. 
■'Humboldt,  /.  c,  iv.  p.  465. 


INSTRUMENTS.  QI 

certain!}'  unsuccessful  from  a  scientific  point  of  view, 
although  no  one  will  deny  its  poetic  beauty. 

Bearing  in  mind  all  that  prehistoric  discoveries  have 
made  manifest,  apart  from  all  romantic  combinations, 
we  may  say  :  the  original  of  the  flute  was  an  ornament, 
the  bone  of  a  captured  animal  or  of  a  slain  enemy  was 
pierced  with  a  hole  and  hung  up  as  a  war  trophy.  By 
this  one  approached  to  the  possibility  of  producing  tones 
from  it.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  from  the  earliest 
of  these  fifes  if  the  openings  were  used  merely  for  hanging 
the  instruments  up,  or  if  they  were  meant  to  be  blown 
into,  but  we  may  consider  the  latter  to  be  the  correct  idea, 
as  pipes  of  the  same  shape  and  construction  which  are 
used  for  producing  tones  have  been  found  to-day  among 
primitive  people.  These  tones  were  at  first  used  as 
signals,  next,  with  some  modifications,  as  signs  of  recogni- 
tion, thus  showing  a  practical  purpose  side  by  side  with 
the  artistic  use  made  of  it  in  accompanying  the  dancing 
songs. 

For  its  extreme  antiquit}-  and  for  its  wide  dissemina- 
tion, this  instrument  is  indebted  in  no  small  degree  to 
the  great  simplicit}-  of  its  construction,  which  was  only 
surpassed  b}-  that  of  the  bow.  Humboldt  says  he  was 
surprised  to  see  with  what  promptitude  the  young  Indians 
constructed  and  tuned  these  pipes  when  they  found  reeds 
on  the  bank  of  the  river.^  Schweinfurth  also  says  of  the 
Bongos  in  Africa  that  they  constructed  small  flutes  with 
little  trouble  and  with  the  poorest  of  materials.-  It  is 
remarkable  in  what  a  simple  manner  savages  sometimes 
tune  their  flutes  together.  Cook  noticed  in  Tahiti  that 
the  natives  used  for  this  purpose  the  shortest  flute,  which 
they  lengthened  by  means  of  a  rolled-up  leaf  that  could 
be  pushed  in  or  drawn  out  until  the  requisite  pitch  was 
arrived  at.     This  they  determine  by  the  ear  alone  "  with 

1  Humboldt,  /.  c,  iv.  p.  465.  ^  Schweinfurth,  /.  c,  i.  p.  130. 


g2  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

great  nicety  ".^  Here  we  have  as  good  an  example  of  the 
harmonic  use  of  the  flute  as  former  examples  have  given 
of  its  rhythmic  use. 

A  somewhat  more  complicated  construction  of  the 
flageolet  was  reported  by  Baker  among  the  Iroquois  (he 
strongly  marks  the  distinction  between  the  flute  and  the 
flageolet).  The  intonation  is  rarely  quite  pure,  and  the 
notes  are  generally  the  first  four  to  six  of  the  minor  scale 
with  (although  not  in  all  instruments)  their  octaves.'' 

Very  frequent  among  primitive  people  is  the  custom 
of  blowing  the  flute  by  means  of  the  nostrils,  w^hen  one 
nostril  is  closed  by  the  finger  and  the  entire  force  of  the 
breath  blown  into  the  flute  through  the  other. 

Mr.  Tylor  agrees  with  C.  Engel  in  explaining  this 
curious  custom  as  a  prejudice  of  the  Hindus ;  no  man  of 
higher  rank  would  ever  touch  with  his  lips  a  flute  which 
a  low  caste  man  has  made  and  put  to  his  mouth  before.^ 
From  India  this  custom  spread  all  over  the  islands  of  the 
Indian  Ocean. 

Flutes,  fifes  and  flageolets  are  to  be  found  in  all 
continents  and  in  all  stages  of  culture.  We  mention  the 
reed-pipe  of  the  Makalaka,*  the  flute  of  the  Ashantis, 
which  is  larger  than  any  kind  used  in  Europe  and  through 
which  the  natives  profess  to  be  able  to  hold  conversation 
with  each  other,^  the  flute  of  the  Mandingoes  *'  and  the 
Malagasy.^  The  Kafirs  use  their  pipes  not  for  an  artistic 
purpose  but  for  calling  their  cattle  from  a  distance.  They 
are  made  of  bone  or  ivory,  and  are  used  b}'  being  held  to 
the  lower  lip  and  sounded  as  we  blow  a  key.  Without  an 
instrument,  too,  the  Kafir  whistles  with  his  lips  alone  or 
by  the  aid  of  his  fingers  so  loudly  "  as  to  half  deafen  any 
one  who  may  be  near  ".     Cook  found  flutes  in  the  islands 

^  Cook,  First  Voyage,  vol.  ii.  p.  205.  -  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  55. 

^  Tylor,  Study  of  Customs,  pp.  81,  82.  ^  Mauch,  /.  c,  p.  43. 

5  Beecham,  /.  c,  p.  168;  Bowdich  Mission,  p.  361. 
"  Mungo  Park,  /.  c,  p.  878.  ''  Gerland,  /.  c,  v.  p.  169. 


INSTRUMENTS.  93 

of  Amsterdam  and  Middleburgh/  and  Hamilton  mentions 
the  pipe  in  Pegu  (East  India). ^  We  find  flutes  among  the 
Dayaks  in  Borneo,^  and  a  pipe  of  deer-bones  among  the 
Indians  of  Columbia.^  A  pecuHar  species  seems  to  be  the 
flute  of  the  Papuans  of  New  Guinea.  They  have  two 
sorts,  the  "male"  and  the  "female"  flute:  the  latter 
constructed  like  a  German  "  Schalmei,"  the  former  rather 
a  small  trombone,  so  far  as  the  construction  is  concerned, 
as  the  natives  prolong  and  shorten  the  hollow  tube  by 
means  of  a  slide  to  produce  different  tones.  Women  are 
forbidden  even  to  see  these  flutes,  as  their  superstitious 
belief  says  they  would  die  at  once  in  face  of  them.'' 
Catlin  found  with  the  Indians  of  North  America  a  war- 
whistle,  a  "deer-skin  flute,"  and  an  instrument  which  he 
calls  a  "  mystery-whistle  "  because  it  was  very  difficult 
to  understand  the  mode  in  which  the  sound  was  produced.^ 
In  travelling  along  the  Amazon  River  Mr.  Wallace  saw  the 
natives  with  flutes  and  pipes  of  reed,  pipes  of  bon^s  and 
skulls.'  The  Botocudos  (Amazon  Valley)  have  a  reed- 
flute  commonly  played  by  women.-  The  Yuruna  (Xingu 
River),  especially,  have  a  great  number  and  variety  of 
flutes  ;  a  long  one  called  Panetatadu,  with  a  tone  like  a 
trumpet,  and  small  bassoons  played  by  women,  and  pan- 
pipes.^ The  aborigines  of  Surinam, ^°  the  Caribs  in  Guiana, 
and  the  natives  in  New  Zealand  have  flutes  of  the  bones 
of   slain   enemies, ^^   and  the   latter  a  nose-flute  as  well.^- 


1  Cook,  Sfcoiid  Voyage ;  Pink.  Collect.,  xi.  p.  594. 

-  Hainilton,  /.  c.,  p.  427.  -^  Hein,  /.  c,  pp.  113-116. 

^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  201  (Columbian  River)  ;  a  bone-whistle  only  used 
by  the  king,  the  chief,  or  some  important  person.     Jewitt,  /.  c.,  p.  88. 

5  Schelling,  /.  c.  "Catlin,  /.  <:.,  i.  p.  242. 

'Wallace,  Amazon,  I.  e.,  p.  504. 

^  Wied-Neuweid,  /.  c.,  abst.,  xli.  p.  155. 

^  Von  d.  Steinen,  /.  c.,  p.  259.  ^"  Stedmann,  /.  e.,  i.  p.  409  (illust.). 

"  D'Urville,  /.  c.,  ii.  p.  446;  Lubbock,  /.  c.,  p.  467  ;  Angas,  Sav.  Life,  p. 
392  ;  Polyii.,  p.  158. 

1^  D'Urville,  ibid. 


94  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

The  flute  "Bendu"  of  the  Kimbunda  people  (/Vfrica)  is  said 
to  be  a  "  hell  for  the  ear  "  ;  ^  something  akin  is  said  of  the 
flutes  of  the  Fulah  and  Susu  (West  Coast  of  Africa).- 

In  some  instances  it  is  particularly  mentioned  in  the 
accounts  of  travellers  that  it  is  possible  to  produce  several 
tones  on  the  flutes.  The  reed-pipe  of  the  Bechuana 
(called  lichaka)  is  played  by  the  natives  in  one  tone  only, 
but  they  tune  it  to  any  required  note  by  pushing  or 
withdrav/ing  a  movable  plug.  They  take  great  pains  in 
getting  the  precise  note  which  they  want.^  The  Karagwe 
tribes  have  a  pipe  with  six  finger  holes.'*  Prominent 
among  the  Niger  people  is  the  "  lera,"  constructed  of  a 
hollow  pipe  of  cane,  with  four  to  six  finger-holes.  At  the 
end  of  the  pipe,  upon  the  upper  side,  a  notch  is  cut, 
forming  the  embouchure.  Such  flutes  appear  common 
throughout  Africa.^  Another  wind  instrument  of  that 
country,  the  "furi,"  is  played  with  three  finger-holes  only, 
covered  respectively  by  the  thumb  and  finger  of  the  right 
hand,  and  the  first  finger  of  the  left.  Instruments  sounded 
by  single  or  double  reeds,  which  are  in  use  in  the  Niger 
territories,  are,  in  Capt.  Day's  opinion,  "distinctly  of 
Mohammedan  introduction  ". 

Brown  speaks  of  an  Indian  flute  with  six  holes  : "  in 
ancient  Mexico  there  was  a  pipe  with  four  holes  (c  d  e  c)  ; '' 
in  Guiana  a  flute  (Quamu)  with  three  tones, ^  "very  much 
resembling  the  howling  of  a  dog  in  distress".  The  New 
Zealanders  have  a  pipe  (He  Koauan)  with  two  holes, 
made  of  a  whale's  tooth ;  ^  in  Amsterdam  and  Middle- 
burgh  (or  Tongatubu  and  Eua)  there  is  a  flute  with  four 
holes,  on  Tahiti  with  two  holes, ^*^  on  Tonga  a  nose-flute 
(played  with  the  right  nostril)  with  five  holes  (fango-fango), 

'  Magyar,  /.  c,  p.  311.  ,    -  Corry,  /.  c,  p.  153. 

3  Burchell,  /.  c.,  ii.  p.  598.  *  Grant,  /.  c,  pp.  184,  185. 

^Day,  Niger,  p.  268.  "  Brown,  /.  f.,  p.  291,  Nos.  10,  14. 

'  Sartorius,  /.  f.,  p.  203.  *  Bernau,  /.  c,  p.  45. 

"  R.  Taylor,  /.  c,  p.  316  (illust.).       ^"  Cook,  Second  Voyage,  i.  p.  2;o. 


INSTRUMENTS.  95 

on  Fiji  Islands  one  with  five  holes,  but  the  natives  scarcely 
vary  the  tone  by  the  closing  and  opening  of  the  holes. ^ 
A  Polynesian  flute  (played  through  the  left  nostril)  is 
mentioned  by  Ellis ;  it  had  three  holes  at  the  top  and  one 
at  the  bottom.^  The  Chukmas  (one  of  the  wild  races  in 
South  Eastern  India)  are  famous  for  their  flute-playing. 
Their  instrument  is  simple  enough,  being  merely  a  joint 
of  bamboo  pierced  with  holes  ;  but  from  this  rough  medium 
they  evoke  "wondrous  soft  music  ".^  In  New  Britain 
and  the  York  Islands  there  is  a  pipe  with  three  tones, ^ 
and  in  North  Luzon  (Philippine  Islands)  a  flute  with  three 
holes. ^ 

From  the  above  it  may  be  seen  that  the  number  of 
holes  is  a  very  limited  one  (as  a  rule  two  to  six),  a  fact 
most  important  for  the  construction  of  the  scale,  as  we 
shall  see  later  on. 

Contrary  to  the  limited  use  savages  make  of  their 
instruments,  we  hear  of  some  instances  where  the  natives 
themselves  are  able  to  play  regular  airs  on  them.  As  the 
Carib  approaches  home  he  generally  plays  his  quamuh 
(flute),  and  preparations  for  his  reception  are  immediately 
made.*"  i  Mus.  Ex.  13.]  An  Iroquois  youth  ahva^•s  pla\'s 
a  certain  melody  when  he  washes  to  entice  his  love 
from  the  hut.'^  The  Warrau  Indians  in  Guiana  ha\-e 
flutes  of  reed  bamboo  or  of  thigh  bones  of  animals.  In 
large  settlements  they  have  a  band  master  or  hohohit, 
whose  duty  it  is  to  train  his  pupils  to  blow  upon  the  flutes, 
in  which  a  small  reed,  on  the  principle  of  the  clarionet,  is 
introduced.  Their  playing  produces  an  effect  similar  to 
the  Russian  horn-bands ;  ^  in  the  same  manner  as  these 

1  Wilkes,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  189;  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  141. 

'    ;.,  p.  188. 


p.  56. 


-  Ellis,  Pol  Ri 

'S., 

,  i. 

p.    285. 

^  Lewin, 

/, 

*  Powell,  /.  c, 

P- 

73 

(illust.). 

5  A.  B.  Meyer, 
^  Schomburgk, 

viii.,  table 
,  p.  274. 

17' 

Nos. 

13,  16. 
'  Baker, 

I. 

^  Schomburgk, 

/. 

c, 

■  P-  274- 

g6  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Russian  bands  play  the  Tipperahs,  who  use  reeds  on  which 
each  performer  plays  his  one  tone  as  his  turn  comes  round. ^ 
The  natives  on  the  Mahadeo  Hills  (Central  India)  sang 
and  danced  to  the  music  of  half-a-dozen  bamboo  flutes. - 

A  peculiar  instrument  of  the  pipe  class  is  the  pan- 
pipe or  syrinx.  It  was  commonly  supposed  that  the  pan- 
pipe represents  the  first  attempt  to  produce  different  tones 
from  one  instrument,-^  and  that  later  on  men  were  induced 
to  obtain  the  same  end  by  perforating  a  pipe  with  holes. 
The  above-mentioned  examples  of  prehistoric  archaeology 
seem  to  point  to  the  contrary.  The  oldest  specimen  of 
pan-pipe  appears  to  be  a  syrinx  found  in  Peru.  It  is  cut 
out  of  a  solid  mass  of  a  compact,  softish  stone  (Lapis 
ollaris).  There  are  eight  pipes  or  cylindrical  tubes,  but 
the  second  octave  of  them,  and  even  a  third  octave,  may 
be  obtained  by  an  expert  performer.  The  condition  of 
the  stone  material  seems  to  indicate  that  "the  Peruvian 
artist  knew  also  how  to  amend  the  tone  b}'  stopping  the 
bottom  of  the  pipe  when  necessary  ".  Although  it  is 
calculated  to  be  of  considerably  anterior  date  to  the 
Spanish  conquest,  the  first-mentioned  prehistoric  flutes 
are  still  the  most  ancient  we  possess."* 

Double  flutes  and  pipes  are  to  be  found  on  almost  all 
the  continents,  although  not  so  frequently  as  the  ordinary 
flute  and  pipe.  Among  the  Iroquois  Mr.  Baker  saw  a 
double^flute  in  the  shape  of  a  V  ;  ^  the  Surinam  Indians 
in  Guiana  had  a  syrinx  called  quarta,*^  "a  set  of  pipes  of 
different  length  ".  In  Guiana  Mr.  Im  Thurn  found  a  double 
flute  of  wood  and  a  pan-pipe  of  reed  ;  "  double  flutes  also 

1  Lewin,  /.  c,  p.  217.  The  Russian  horn-band  (invented  by  Maresch, 
175 1 )  originally  consisted  of  sixteen  horns  of  different  pitch.  Each  player 
played  one  tone  only,  but  by  a  clever  combination  they  succeeded  in  execu- 
ting the  most  complicated  compositions  ;  compare  Hinrichs,  /.  c. 

-  Forsyth,  /.  c,  p.  iig.  ■'  Daniel,  Faiitaisie,  etc.,  p.  388. 

-•  Traill,  /.  c,  p.  124.  ^  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  55. 

'■'  Stedmann,  /.  c,  i.  409  (illust.,  p.  423). 

"  Im  Thurn,  /.  c,  p.  309. 


INSTRUMENTS.  97 

occur  on  Savage  Islands  (Polynesia)/  a  pan-flute  of  reed 
on  the  islands  Amsterdam  and  Middleburgh  with  ten  to 
eleven  tubes  of  different  length,"'  a  pan-flute  with  seven 
tones  in  Sumatra,^  North  Luzon,*  New  Britain,  and  the 
York  Islands^  (seven  to  fifteen  notes),  the  Fiji  Islands,*"' 
Admiralty  Islands,^  with  the  Papuans  (with  thirteen 
tones), *^  the  New  Hebrides  (eight  tubes),^  and  in  Samoa  ;  ^^ 
here  the  flute  is  beaten  with  a  stick. 

The  Tipperahs  have  a  most  curious  musical  instru- 
ment, in  sound  something  between  an  organ  and  a  bagpipe. 
It  is  made  from  a  gourd,  into  which  long  reed  pipes  of 
different  lengths  are  inserted,  which  have  each  one  hole- 
stop. ^^ 

Mr.  Ives  found  with  the  Keres  in  New  Mexico  an 
instrument  with  an  end  like  a  clarionet  ^^  (Bancroft  never- 
theless calls  it  reed-flntc)  ;  ^^  one  end  is  put  into  a  water 
basin,  by  blowing  into  which  the  warbling  of  birds  was 
imitated.  The  Keres  often  use  the  bagpipe,  not  for  an 
artistic  purpose  but  while  at  work,  to  keep  time  to  its 
music. ^^  This  is  one  of  the  numerous  examples  where 
music  has  to  serve  a  practical  purpose.  I  particularly 
wish  to  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  such  examples, 
as  we  shall  have  to  make  use  of  them  in  our  conclusions 
in  the  tenth  chapter.  At  Tascala  and  Natividad  an 
Okarina  was  in  use  (Teponastle)  three  feet  long  with  a 
human  face  in  front.^^'' 

'  Turner,  Polyii. ,  p.  470. 

-  Cook,  Second  Voyage,  i.  p.  220  (illust.  No.  5). 

3  Bastian,  Indon.,  Liefg.  3,  table  2.     -•  Meyer,  /.  c.,  viii.,  table  17,  No.  16. 

•^Powell,  /.  c,  p.  73.  "Williams,  /.  c,  p.  141. 

''  Challenger  Exped.,  i.  2,  p.  723. 

'^  Miklukho  Maklay,  /.  c.,  p.  845  ;  Schelling,  /.  c. 

^Turner,  Polyn.,  p.  337  (illust.).        ^^  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  125. 
^^  Lewin,  /.  c.,  p.  217.  i- Ives,  Colorado  River,  p.  121. 

1^  Bancroft,  /.  e.,  i.  p.  552. 
^^  Davis,  El  Gringo,  p.  119. 

15  Bancroft,  I.  c.,  iv.  p.  478  (illust.) ;  a  clarionet  (Chirimiya)  of  the 
Lacandones  mentioned  by  Bancroft,  i.  p.  705. 

7 


g8  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

What  we  know  as  the  modern  bagpipe  seems  to  be 
derived  from  common  reed  pipes  (single  and  double)  by 
a  process  recently  described  in  a  very  interesting  and 
elaborate  paper  by  Mr.  H.  Balfour,  and  in  his  collection 
of  horn-pipes  (historically  arranged)  in  the  Oxford  Museum. 
At  first  the  reeds  were  protected  from  injury  by  a  large 
mouthpiece  of  gourd  or  of  horn.^  By  perforating  the 
cover  a  secondary  use  was  found  for  it  as  a  mouthpiece, 
through  which  the  reeds  could  be  sounded.-  Later  on  a 
skin  was  substituted  for  the  sake  of  a  continuous  blast, 
the  necessity  of  which  seems  to  have  been  felt  long  before. 
Thus  the  Bhotanese  were  able  to  sustain  prolonged  blasts 
upon  the  hautboy,  and  so,  too,  did  the  Brahmins  of  India.^ 
Mr.  Balfour  concludes  that  horn-pipe  instruments  were 
very  probably  "  brought  to  the  British  Islands  with  the 
Celtic  immigration,  and  that  they  have  survived  par- 
ticularl}'  in  those  regions  in  which  the  Celtic  blood  has 
held  its  own  ".^  From  such  instruments  the  Picborn 
(identical  with  the  horn-pipe)  is  derived. 

Another  theory  is  that  the  bagpipe  might  probably 
have  been  brought  to  England  by  the  gipsies.  Pennell 
leaves  this  question  open.^  In  other  countries  she  thinks 
the  gipsies'  influence  is  more  clearly  noticeable.  Thus  the 
Spanish  name  for  bagpipe,  "gaita,"  belongs  to  the  Greek 
dialect  of  Romani,^  and  is  the  same  as  "gaiida,"  applied 
to  the  same  instrument  by  the  Turkish  gipsies,  "from 
which  the  inference  is  that  Spain  owes  this  name,  if  not 
the  instrument  itself,  to  the  gipsies  ".  The  editor  of  the 
Gyps.  Lore  Soc.  Jonrn.  further  calls  attention  to  Walker's 
statement  {Irish  Bards,  p.  165):  "The  Wal-Pipe  of  the 
Finns  seems  to  be  the  Cala-Mala  of  the  Zingari  of  Swin- 
burne, and  Mala-Pioba  (or  piob-mhala)  of  the  Irish '". 
For   the    British    Islands,    however,    the    immigration    of 

^  H.  Balfour,  /.  c,  p.  147.  -Ibid.,  p.  152. 

^Ibid.,  p.  147.  *Ibid.,  p.  152. 

^  Pennell,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  276.  *^  Jonrn.  Gyps.  Lore  Soc,  i.  p.  302. 


INSTRUMENTS.  99 

gipsies  seems  to  be  too  late  a  date  for  the  introduction  of 
bagpipes,  and  therefore  Mr.  Balfour's  theory  has  in  itself 
a  far  greater  historical  probability.  Even  the  Spaniards 
may  have  got  bagpipes  from  the  ancient  Romans  (Nero 
was  a  bagpipe  player).  Very  Hkely  the  gipsies  brought 
the  bagpipe  and  reed-pipe  from  India  with  them,  and  may 
have  brought  it  in  fashion  again  in  some  countries,  but 
were  certainly  not  the  first  who  imported  it  to  Europe. 

(<-)  TRUMPETS,   TUBES,   HORNS. 

If  the  peculiar  custom  of  playing  the  flute  with  the 
nose  has  struck  us  as  being  remarkable,  so,  in  the  case 
of  the  tube,  equally  noteworthy  is  the  habit  of  playing  it 
like  a  European  flute,  and  this,  too,  in  spite  of  its  huge 
size  and  weight.^  Consequently  its  tone  is  not  unlike 
that  of  a  fife  or  flute,  but  is  both  louder  and  fuller.  The 
signal  horns  of  the  Bongos  (Central  Africa),  which  are 
made  from  the  horns  of  antelopes,  are  said  by  Schwein- 
furth  to  be  very  similar  in  tone  to  the  fife.'^  They  have 
three  holes  like  a  small  flute  and  are  called  "  Mangoal  " 
by  the  natives ;  the  Mittu  signal  horns  are  constructed 
on  exactly  similar  lines.^  The  Congo  people  frequently 
make  them  of  very  costly  materials,  and  for  this  reason, 
I  think,  they  are  the  property  of  persons  of  royal  blood. 
This  certainly  is  the  case  with  the  ivory  trumpet, 
"  Embuchi,"  of  the  Angola  tribes."^  Very  early,  it  seems, 
arose  the  need  for  making  the  inconvenient  form  of  the 
tube  more  handy,  and  while  Europeans  succeeded  in 
artistically  bending  the  tube,  the  Karagwes  were  content 
to  construct  their  instruments  like  a  telescope  to  draw 
out  and  in.^  Ivory  horns  are  found  among  Niam-Niams,^ 
the    Mandingoes,''    the    Jebus,^   and   in    the    Niger    coun- 

1  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  627  ;  Day,  Niger,  p.  268. 

-  Schweinfurth,  /.  c,  i.  p.  130.  '■^  Ibid.,  p.  197. 

•*  Carli,  /.  c,  i.  p.  622;  Tuckey,  I.  c,  p.  373  ;  Merolla,  /.  c,  p.  244. 

5  Grant,  /.  c,  pp.  184-185.  "  Ch.  Long,  /.  c,  p.  279. 

'■  M.  Park,  I.  c,  p.  878.  **  Avezac,  I.  c,  p.  90. 


100  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

tries  ^ ;  horns  of  the  Harrisbuck  among  the  Makalaka^ 
and  the  iVrbalunda  negroes.'^  In  East  Africa  the}-  use 
wooden  horns,'*  which  Burton  calls  "noise  instruments". 
Even  this  is  something,  however,  for  the  valuable  ivory 
horns  of  the  Ashantis  are  so  badly  treated  that  now  and 
then  they  crack  and  at  last  give  no  tone  at  all.  But  their 
tone  at  the  best  of  times  cannot  be  particularly  beautiful, 
for  the  instruments  are  always  covered  wdth  snake  skin.^ 
Still  this  remark  of  Wood's  is  not  invariably  accurate,  for 
several  reports  mention  not  onl}- the  "powerful  sounds" 
of  these  horns,  but  also  the  fact  that  each  Cabucir  plays 
upon  it  his  own  peculiar  song  which  is  known  to  all. 
This  working  up  of  different  tones  of  the  horn  into  a 
melody  does  not  occur  in  sentimental  serenades  or  the 
like  as  has  been  said,  but  is  used  to  communicate  the 
position  of  the  chief  to  his  warriors  in  a  battle.''  In  times 
of  peace  this  "leit-motiv''  may  also  be  used  for  other 
purposes ;  its  original  idea  however  is  connected  with 
war,  as  may  also  be  seen  in  the  trophy  fastened  to  the 
instrument,  and  which  is  a  man's  upper  jaw. 

On  the  upper  Amur  wooden  horns  are  wrapped  in  the 
leaves  of  a  lime  tree  ;  '^  on  the  Malay  Peninsula  bamboo 
tubes  pierced  with  holes  are  hung  upon  trees  in  the  forest 
(and  are  called  "  Buluperindu  ").  The  effect  of  the  wind 
passing  through  suggests  the  "  soft  and  tender  tones  of  the 
flute  as  well  as  the  deep,  full  notes  of  an  organ  ".  Some 
of  the  bamboos  give  fourteen  to  twenty  notes. '^  The 
Maoris  use  their  seven  foot  wooden  tubes  {putitra-piitura) 

^  Day,  Niger,  p.  268. 

-  Mauch,  /.  c,  p.  43  ;  the  Jewish  Schoftat  is  evidently  a  buck's  horn 
from  primeval  times. 

*  Soyaux,  /.  c,  pp.  175-176.  ^  Burton,  Ccntr.  Lakes,  ii.  p.  98. 

^  Wood,  /.  e.,  i.  p.  627. 

•*  Beecham,  /.   c,  p.    168;  ivory  trumpets  in  Guinea  by  Bosman,  /.  e.„ 

P-  394- 

"Andree,  Ainiirgeb.,  p.  173. 

8  Tennent,  /.  c,  i.  p.  88,  note  i  ;  Bickmore,  /.  c,  p.  191. 


INSTRUMENTS.  lOI 

for  purposes  of  war  ;  during  an  uproar  they  blow  them 
with  such  vigour  as  to  be  heard  at  a  distance  of  several 
English  miles. ^ 

The  Indians  of  the  Uaupes  (tributary  of  the  Rio  Negro) 
make  and  use  huge  tubes  "which  resemble  bassoons,"  and 
of  which  eight  different  sizes  are  used  in  the  Juripari  or 
devil's  music.  The  tone  is  not  unpleasant,  and  the 
Indians  play  them  tolerably  w^ell  together.  Wallace  says 
the  instruments  are  made  of  bark  spirally  twisted  and 
with  a  mouthpiece  of  leaves.-  The  natives  waved  their 
instruments  vertically  and  sideways  attended  by  cor- 
responding movements  of  the  body,  and  played  a  regular 
melody  accompanying  each  other  very  correctly.  The 
women  are  not  allowed  even  to  look  upon  these  instru- 
ments under  pain  of  death,  which  is  caused  by  poison. 
It  is  said  that  fathers  have  been  the  executioners  of  their 
own  daughters,  husbands  of  their  wives.^  It  might  be 
wished  that  a  symbolical  remnant  of  some  such  prohibition 
might  be  found  in  the  course  of  the  general  development 
of  instruments  from  the  Indian  tube  to  the  modern 
pianoforte  of  our  periods  of  culture. 

A  bamboo  tube  (Caracasha)  on  the  Lower  Amazon  "^ 
and  a  wooden  trumpet  in  Guiana  ^  are  mentioned  among 
the  wdnd  instruments  of  Northern  South  America;  the 
children  of  the  Bateke  (Congo)  make  trumpets  from  roUed- 
up  banana  leaves.*^ 

A  much  simpler  tube  is  found  on  the  isles  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  where  a  mussel-shell  is  used  for  this 
purpose  ;  this  is  also  used  on  the  Congo, ^  in  Fiji,^  and  on 
the  Cornwallis  Islands.'^     The  tone  of  a  mussel  trumpet 

1  Angas,  Savage  Life,  p.  152.  "Wallace,  Aiiiaz.,  pp.  348-349. 

■^  Ibid.  ■*  Bates,  /.  c,  i.  p.  311. 

5  Im  Thurn,  /.  c,  p.  309.  «  Johnston,  Congo,  p.  432. 

''  Tuckey,  /.  c,  p.  373. 

8  Wilkes,  /.  c.,  iii.  p.  189;  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  141. 

8  Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  113. 


102  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

as  used  in  Fiji  by  the  priests  in  their  temples  was  more 
terrific  than  that  of  the  drum.  The  instrument  was  a  foot 
long  and  seven  inches  in  diameter  at  the  mouth.  In  order 
to  facilitate  the  blowing  a  three  foot  long  bamboo  reed 
was  introduced  and  blown  into.^  These  sea  mussel-shells 
were  always  used  when  processions  went  into  the  temples. 
On  other  occasions  bamboo  tubes  (Thura)  are  used.  The 
Papuans  have  a  trumpet  made  from  the  shells  of  tritonmm 
vnyicgatinu,^  which  is  probably  used  for  alarm  signals.^ 
A  shell  trumpet,  found  in  Madagascar,  sounds  like  a 
post-horn  ;  with  it  the  husband,  father,  or  son  calls  the 
women  together,  who  then  approach  their  masters 
crawling  on  hands  and  knees.'* 

The  Haussa  (Guinea)  have  the  kakaki,  a  long  brass 
instrument  which  sounds  like  a  trombone ;  it  is  an  attri- 
bute of  a  chief.''     In  Sumatra  a  tube  made  of  an  ox  horn 


(</)  CASTANETS. 

Cook  in  his  Voyages  mentions  a  peculiar  dance  and 
song  of  women  on  the  islands  of  Amsterdam  and  Middle- 
burgh.  As  they  sang,  the}'  marked  time  in  a  very  simple 
manner  by  snapping  their  fingers.''  It  appears  then  that 
in  a  very  primitive  state  of  culture  there  is  a  general 
tendency  to  give  rhythmic  movement  during  songs  by  the 
use  of  the  fingers.  Compared  with  hand-clapping,  foot- 
stamping  and  beating  the  hips,  this  is  undoubtedly  the 
most  elegant  substitute  for  instrumental  accompaniment. 
Naturally  later  it  was  replaced  by  a  definite  instrument, 
which  has  remained  with  us  to  the  present  day.  In 
Africa  the  natives  were  acquainted  with  it.  The  home 
of  the  castanets,  or  at  an\-  rate  the  land  in  which  they 

1  Ellis,  Polvn.,  ii.  p.  2S3.  -  Schelling,  /.  c. 

3  Rosenberg,  /.  c,  p.  93.  ■*  Drury,  /.  c,  p.  67. 

■''  Flegel,  /.  c,  p.  25.  "  Bastian,  Indoii.,  table  2,  Lfg.  3  (illust.). 

"  Cook,  Second  Voyage,  in  Pink.  Collect.,  vol.  xi.  p.  594. 


INSTRUMENTS.  IO3 

were  most  commonly  used,  appears  to  be  America,  where 
Indians  used  a  couple  of  mussel-shells  tied  together  for 
this  purpose.^  This  custom  is  particularly  mentioned 
among-  the  Hyperboreans."  Among  the  Indians  of 
Yucatan  both  kinds  of  finger  movements  were  in  use, 
with  and  without  instruments.  When  at  their  amuse- 
ments the  Indians  changed  their  native  dance  to  a 
Spanish  one,  they  from  time  to  time  snapped  their  fingers 
instead  of  using  castanets.^  Possibly  these  instruments 
were  introduced  by  the  Spaniards  from  their  American 
colonies  to  Europe,  where  even  now  they  are  popular  in 
national  dances.  Another,  and  a  very  much  beloved, 
instrument  with   Indians  is  the 

(f)  RATTLE. 

This  is  made  from  a  gourd  or  mussel-shell,  or  from  raw 
hide  filled  with  small  pebbles  or  dried  fruit  stones,  and  is 
shaken  about  "to  mark  the  time  and  rhythm  ■*  of  dances 
and  songs  ".  On  Columbia  River  the  Indians  use  the 
skin  of  a  seal  arranged  like  a  fish  and  filled  with  stones.^ 
The  Abipons**  in  South  America  and  the  Mississugua 
Indians"  use  a  gourd  filled  with  fruit  stones;  to  this  the 
Abipons  make  by  way  of  accompaniment  a  peculiar  noise 
by  drawing  their  fingers  rapidly  over  their  lips.  The 
Uaupe  Indians  of  the  Amazon  use  a  tortoise-shell  as  a 
rattle.^  Some  tribes  seem  to  have  a  highly  trained  ear 
for  the  *'  tone  "  of  a  rattle,  and  to  be  particularly  fond  of 
it.  It  is  not  alwa\s  a  mere  "  instrument  of  noise  "  ;  in 
Virginia  (North  America),  for  instance,  several  rattles  are 
tuned  together  and  the  natives  have  "bass,  tenor,  counter- 
tenor, alto  and  soprano  rattles  ".'-' 

ijewitt,  /.  c,  p.  88.  -Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  112. 

^  Stephens,  /.  c,  i.  p.  145.  ■■  Catlin,  /.  c,  i.  p.  242. 

5  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  201.  ''  Dobrizhoffer,  /.  c,  i.  p.  66. 

''  Chamberlain,  /.  c,  p.  158;  Neuwied,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  190;  the  rattle  is  called 
Chichikoue. 

'^  Wallace,  Aiiiaz.,  I.  c,  p.  504.  ^  John  Smith,  /.  c,  p.  38. 


104  PRIMITIVE    MUvSIC. 

In  Africa,  too,  the  rattle  is  well  known.  Hottentot 
dancers  fasten  a  number  of  small  ones  to  their  ankles  and 
so  very  distinctly  mark  time.^  The  Congo  people  -  also 
know  the  rattle  ;  they  have  it  in  war  and  are  so  clever  in 
its  use  as  to  be  able  to  shake  them  in  a  variety  of  tones  ; 
by  this  they  indicate  to  the  rest  of  the  warriors  behind  in 
what  danger  they  are.^ 

A  sort  of  rattle  seems  to  be  the  "fly-fan  with  bells" 
with  which  the  Bashilange  chief,  Chingege,  received  the 
European  travellers :  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  a  semi- 
circle, his  feet  on  the  legs  of  his  wives,  and  allowed  his 
majestic  movements  to  be  accompanied  by  a  big  drum."* 

In  the  West  Torres  Straits  rattles  also  occur  ;  they 
are  called   Padatrong.^ 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  human  skull  is 
used  as  a  rattle  ready  made.  So  it  appears  that  it  is  with 
the  rattle  as  with  the  flute  :  a  part  of  the  slain  enemy's 
body  is  carried  triumphantly  as  an  article  of  ornament, 
and  is  later  on  used  as  an  instrument  to  produce  tones. 
It  has  here,  too,  a  military  not  an  artistic  purpose  which 
leads  men  to  use  and  to  appreciate  a  variety  of  tones,  a 
signal,  a  melody.  So  it  is  with  the  flute,  the  rattle,  the 
trumpet,  the  drum,  the  gong  and  the  tamtam.  This 
shows  once  more  how  intimately  primitive  musical  instru- 
ments, and  with  them  primitive  music,  are  connected  with 
a  practical  purpose. 

(/)   TAMTAM  AND  GONG. 

The  sounding  stone  plate  (gong),  together  with  the 
flute,  are  the  most  ancient  prehistoric  instruments.  Even 
at  the  present  day  the  Chinese  have  an  instrument  which 
merely  consists  of  a  number  of  resounding  stone  plates  of 
different  sizes,  which  are  hung  up  in  a  sort  of  frame  in 

*  Burchell,  i.  p.  66.  -  Tuckey,  /.  c,  p.  373. 

•*  Astley  Collect.,  iii.  p.  281.  "*  Wissmann,  First  Voyage,  p.  72. 

'"  Haddon,  West  Ton-.,  p.  374  (musical  exampl.). 


INSTRUMENTS.  IO5 

two  rows.  The  Javese  ^ong-  differs  from  this,  but  even  in 
Java  the  union  of  several  gongs  into  one  instrument  is 
well  known  (Bonang  or  Kroms),  and,  in  addition,  there  is 
the  Gambang,  which  is  made  of  wooden  or  brass  bars  of 
various  lengths  laid  crosswise  over  a  trough.^  Moreover, 
in  Java  the  natives  have  huge  Gomgoms  shaped  like 
hollow  iron  bowls  of  different  sizes,  and  each  giving  a 
different  tone  from  the  others  when  struck  with  an  iron 
or  wooden  stick.-  The  Malay  gong,  which  is  also  common 
among  the  Dyaks  in  Borneo,  produces  by  no  means  so 
clear  a  note  as  that  of  the  Chinese  ;  its  tone  is  muffled, 
and  the  instrument  is  used  at  night  for  signalling.  Kru- 
senstern,  however,  mentions  some  Malay  gongs  made  of 
copper  which  produced  a  charming  tone.^  Despite  the 
obvious  simplicity  of  the  instrument,  the  natives  modulate 
its  tone  excellently,  and  keep  time  so  accurately  that  the 
effect  is  "anything  but  inharmonious".^  In  Borneo  there 
are  gongs  made  of  brass  pans  which  vary  in  tone  between 
tenor  and  bass  ;  to  the  music  of  these  is  added  that  of 
resounding  chains,  which  are  thrown  in  the  air,  or  of 
small,  crooked  pieces  of  iron,  which  are  hammered.  Mr. 
Beeckmann  compares  this  music  to  the  sounds  heard  in 
"  a  butcher's  establishment  or  in  a  copper  smithy  ".^  It 
forms  a  sort  of  musical  prelude  performed  on  the  evening 
before  a  wedding. 

In  Dahomey  a  tamtam  purloined  from  an  enemy  is 
a  very  much  sought  after  trophy  by  the  victor,  and  is 
decorated  with  human  skulls !  ^  In  Guiana  the  tamtam 
is  made  of  rolled  bark  covered  in  tiger  skin  ;  ^  in  Aduma 
(Ogowe,  West  Africa)  a  hollow  piece  of  wood  is  used  with 
goat    skin   drawn   tightly  over  it,^    in   East  Africa  a  thin 


1  Bickmore,  /.  c,  p.  191  (illust.).  -  Stavorinus,  /.  c,  p.  172. 

3  Krusenstern,  /.  c,  i.  p.  197.  "*  Marryat,  /.  c,  p.  84. 

•'  Beeckmann,  /.  c,  p.  122.  "  Bouche,  /.  c,  p.  95. 

''  Bernau,  /.  c,  p.  45.  **  Lenz,  /.  c,  pp.  286-288. 


I06  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

iron  plate. ^     In  many  parts  of  West  Africa  it  is  played 
b}-  slaves,  for  it  is  a  wearisome  and  exhausting  work.- 

The  sound  of  a  tamtam  excites  the  natives  visibly. 
During  a  dance  of  medicine-men  in  Ashuka  (West 
Africa)  several  young  people  were  made  positively  ill 
by  the  sound  and  the  general  exciting  scene.  They  broke 
suddenly  from  the  line,  ran  about  on  all  fours  like  animals 
on  the  grass  and  commenced  to  rave,  and  were  only  with 
difficulty  overcome  and  taken  aside.  In  the  villages,  during 
the  terrible  dances  of  the  Oganga  (priests),  such  fits  had 
no  end ;  wherever  one  looked,  one  saw  these  unhapp}' 
creatures  rolling  about,  and  it  was  all  that  the  old  men 
and  women  could  do  to  get  them  to  their  huts.^  The 
Bakalai,  too,  become  frenzied  at  the  sound  of  the  tamtam, 
but  are  calmed  by  the  tone  of  an  Ombi  *  (guitar,  with 
strings  of  tree  roots). 

(jr)    BELLS. 

The  bell  was  originall\-  a  kind  of  rattle."'  In  its  most 
primitive  form  it  was  made  from  a  nut-shell  or  of  some 
other  hard  fruit.  Further  progress  in  its  construction  was 
marked  by  the  use  of  hollowed-out  pieces  of  hard  wood, 
and  lastly  iron.  The  original  form  of  the  bell,  as  figured 
by  Wood  (Lane  Fox  Collection),  is  precisely  similar  to  a 
species  of  the  number  of  rattles  in  use  among  the  Maganja 
tribes.  In  Dahomey  iron  bells  ^  are  found  employee  par  les 
feticheiirs ;  others  are  worn  by  the  leader  of  female  water- 
carriers.  At  the  sounds  of  them  the  men  rush  to  the 
bushes,    for    the}'    are    afraid    of   being    compelled    to    be 

^  Burton,  C.  L.  of  Afr.,  ii.  p.  gS.  -  Lenz,  /.  c,  p.  301. 

'■^  Ibid.,  p.  igg.  ^  Du  Chaillu,  Eqii.  Afr.,  p.  3gi. 

^  Sir  J.  Stainer  calls  the  bell  a  double  gong  or  tamtam.  This  derivation 
is  no  doubt  correct  as  far  as  the  more  modern  iron  form  is  concerned.  As 
the  most  primitive  form,  however,  is  made  of  hard  fruit,  I  think  I  may 
suggest  the  bells  being  derived  from  the  rattle. 

"  Bouche,  /.  c,  p.  96. 


INSTRUMENTS.  IO7 

answerable  in  case  of  a  jug  falling  or  being  broken. 
Doubtless  the  blame  would  be  put  upon  the  men.^  Among 
the  people  of  the  Congo  an  iron  double  bell,  Longa,  is 
carried  before  princes.-  "The  Ogangas  (Ogowe  Lake) 
carry  clumsy  iron  '  magic  bells,  everywhere  a  sign  of  a 
priest ' ;  with  them  they  go  in  procession  from  the  villages, 
and  firmly  believe  they  will  always  find  treasure  on  their 
return— which,  indeed,  they  do.  For  the  priests  arrange 
these  processions  only  when  they  know  that  a  transport 
is  going  up  country  from  the  coast."  Mr.  Lenz  closes 
this  report  with  the  words  :  "  It  is  here,  among  these  raw 
children  of  nature,  as  everywhere  else  in  the  world  ;  he 
only  speculates  well  who  speculates  in  the  stupidit}'  of 
others  ".^ 

The  Maoris  in  New  Zealand  have  a  bell,  "  Pahu," 
which  is  used  for  purposes  of  war.^  The  Pegu  in  East 
India  unite  twenty  bells  into  one  instrument,  which  is 
beaten  with  sticks,  "  and  the}'  make  no  bad  music  "."' 

In  view  of  the  already  mentioned  ethnological  examples 
and  especially  of  the  Fox  Collection,  Gardiner's  opinion 
"that  the  bell  is  of  Chinese  origin  and  like  the  ancient 
gong  was  generally  made  of  copper"  cannot  be  maintained.*^ 
It  is  one  of  the  most  common  errors  to  commence  history 
with  one  of  the  civilised  races  of  Asia,  if  not  with  the 
Romans  and  the  Greeks. 

The  Glockenspiel  of  Tima,  which  consisted  of  five  brass 
plates  on  bamboo  cylinders  mentioned  by  Bastian,^  is  rather 
a  form  of  the  marimba  (q.  v.).  The  Javese  bells  on  Banda 
Island,  to  the  number  of  twelve,  sounded  from  a  distance 
like  a  string  orchestra.^ 

^  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  635. 

-  Angelo  and  Carli,  /.  c,  p.  160;  Merolla,  /.  c,  p.  244. 

»Lenz,  /.  f.,  p.  317  :  bells  of  the  Mandingoes,  M.  Park,  /.  c,  878. 

^  Angas,  Sav.  Life,  p.  152.         ^  A.  Hamilton,  /.  c,  p.  427. 

•^  W.  Gardiner,  /.  c,  p.  269.       '  Bastian,  Indon.,  table  2,  Lfg.  2  (illust.). 

**  dialling.  Exped.,  i.  2,  p.  567. 


Io8  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

(/i)   JMUSICAL-BOXES. 

The  principle  of  our  musical-box  is  not  unknown  among 
primitive  people.  The  Batoka  and  Manganja  tribes  on 
the  Zambesi,  which  possess  a  large  number  of  musical 
instruments,  have  one  of  the  earliest  forms  of  this  instru- 
ment which  they  call  sansa.  It  consists  of  a  board 
upon  which  a  number  of  wooden  pegs  are  fastened  on  end, 
so  that  when  one  end  is  pressed  down  and  released  a  sort 
of  musical  note  is  produced.^  This,  with  certain  modiiica- 
tions,  is  frequently  found  in  Central  Africa  and  "  differs 
from  the  modern  musical-box  only  in  that  the  teeth  of  ours 
are  made  of  steel  and  not  of  wood,  and  the  tone  of  ours  is 
produced  by  cylinders  and  pins,  theirs  by  the  fingers". 
An  advance  on  this  type  is  the  nibira  of  the  Makalaka ; 
a  square  piece  of  wood  upon  which  metal  tongues,  made 
fast  to  one  end  between  thick  iron  wire  and  pieces  of 
wood,  bring  forth  tones.  "  This  has  a  compass  of  some 
two  to  three  octaves"  (unfortunately  the  exact  notes  are 
not  given).  It  is  fixed  inside  a  calabash  on  the  rim  of  the 
opening  of  which  are  mussel  and  spiral  shells.- 

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  popularity  of  the 
European  musical-box.  Specimens  with  a  glockenspiel 
and  drum  are  preferred  to  any  other  kind  by  the  negroes,^ 
and  sometimes  they  are  even  feared.  "The  people  of 
Mayolo's  clan  took  to  their  heels  at  once  when  they  heard 
the  musical-box,  presuming  that  a  devil  must  be  in  it."^ 

{i)   DRUM,   KETTLE-DRUM,  TAMBOURINE. 

The  drum  is  the  most  important  and  most  widely 
spread  instrument  of  savage  races.  It  has  already  been 
mentioned  that  it  is  not  at  all  the  most  ancient  instrument 
we  know,  and  that  there  is  a  small  number  of  tribes  who 
do  not  know  even  the  drum.      It  is  curious  that  the   New 


'  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  392.  -  Mauch,  /.  c,  p.  43. 

^  Elson,  /.  c,  p.  269.  ■*  Du  Chaillu,  Ashongo  Land,  p.  192. 


INSTRUMENTS.  IO9 

Zealanders,  who  themselves  do  not  possess  a  drum,  should 
find  so  much  pleasure  in  a  noisy  European  drum,  while 
delightful  music — as  Thomson  remarks — does  not  excite 
their  emotions.^  The  Australians,  too,  do  not  know  the 
drum,  and  yet  they  have  a  better  ear  for  rhythm  than  for 
melody,  and  did  not  appreciate  Mr.  Lumholtz's  songs  in 
any  way.^  A  thick  piece  of  hard  wood  in  form  of  a  club, 
to  beat  time  with,  is  rare  ;  sometimes  the  natives  beat 
sticks  together,^  or  beat  on  rolled  deer  hides, ^  or  beat  a 
stick  against  a  flat  board.-'  The  natives  of  the  Fiji  Islands 
use  sticks  to  drum  with  (but  the  drum  as  well)  ;  they  beat 
the  long  ones  with  the  small  ones,  and  get  quite  "  clear 
notes"  out  of  them.''  The  Molua,  in  Africa,  beat  a 
wooden  box  (ginguva),  open  at  the  upper  end,  like  a  kettle- 
drum." The  Niam-Niam  beat  a  sinon-like  wooden  horse 
on  its  sides  with  drum-sticks;  several  performers  beat  suc- 
cessively upon  different-sized  pieces  of  dried  wood  fixed 
across  parallel  banana  trees. '^  Among  the  Columbians, 
on  the  Columbia  River,  the  instruments  are  boxes  and 
benches  struck  with  sticks,  a  plank  hollowed  out  on  the 
under  side  and  beaten  with  drum-sticks  about  a  foot 
long.-' 

With  the  Greenlanders  the  drum  is  the  only  musical 
instrument ;  it  is  played  with  the  right  hand  and  held 
with  the  left.  This  is  accompanied  by  many  wonderful 
motions  of  the  head  and  whole  body,  and  performed  in 
common  musical  time,  so  that  two  strokes  fall  in  every 
crotchet. ^"^  The  Finnish  Laplanders  have  a  drum  called 
kannus  or  oenobdus,  made  out  of  a  hollow  piece  of  wood. 
It  must  either  be  of  pine,   fir,  or  birch  tree,  which  they 

^  Wood,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  137.  -  Lumholtz,  /.  c,  p.  156. 

-*  Eyre,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  228.  *  Ibid.,  p.  237. 

^  Grey,  Two  Expcd.,  ii.  p.  305.  "  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  141. 

"  Pogge,  /.  c,  p.  241.    (Kalunda  tribes  near  Mussumba,  23°  long.,  9°  lat.)' 
*  Ch.  Long,  /.  c,  p.  279.  "  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  201. 

1"  Crantz,  /.  c,  p.  162. 


no  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

believe  very  acceptable  to  the  sun,  which  thev  worship. 
They  draw  near  the  middle  of  the  drum  several  lines  quite 
across  it,  and  upon  these  they  place  the  image  of  Christ 
and  the  apostles,  above  this  the  stars,  the  sun,  and  the 
moon.  Below  the  sun  there  are  terrestrial  things  and 
living  creatures.^ 

This  heathen  fetish  has  become  obsolete  among  the 
Laplanders  in  the  Christian  era.  Worshipping  the  drum 
is  still  a  most  frequent  custom,  especially  in  Africa. 

Peculiar  shapes  of  drums  are  to  be  found  with  the 
Hottentots.  They  are  called  water  drums  ;  the  instru- 
ment is  a  wooden  bowl  or  bamboo,  on  which  a  piece 
of  skin  has  been  tightly  stretched.  A  little  water  is 
previously  poured  into  the  bowl,  which  keeps  the  skin 
continually  wet.  It  is  beaten  with  the  forefinger  of  the 
right  hand,  and  is  kept  at  the  proper  pitch  of  the  songs.- 
The  Chukchi  have  a  hand  kettle-drum,  which  they  keep 
wet  wath  water.  When  drumming  they  sit  down,  while 
two  others  stretch  a  strap  over  the  drummer's  head. 
Then  the  drummer  slightly  jumps  up  and  the  strap  is 
quickly  thrown  over  and  drawn  away  under  him  by  the 
others.^  At  Kerian  the  Erubians  (south  of  New  Guinea) 
had  a  drum  in  shape  like  a  very  elongated  hour- 
glass, made  of  a  hollow  piece  of  wood,  emitting  a  low, 
resonant  sound.*  The  same  shape  is  to  be  met  with 
in  the  Niger  territories.^  In  New  Guinea  the  drum  is 
only  known  in  some  districts  ;  ^  the  Papuans  have  several 
varieties  of  them,  large  and  small,  the  sound  of  which  is  to 
be  heard  for  as  many  as  four  and  a  half  miles  ;  ^  the  Dyaks 
have  some  of  an  iron-wood  block  covered  wnth  the  skin 
of  different  animals  (Ntawan)  ;  ^  others  are  decorated  with 

1  Schefferus,  /.  c,  p.  47  (illus.). 

-  Burchell,  /.  c,  i.  p.  66 ;   Fritsch,  Eiiigcb.,  p.  327  ;   Thunberg,  /.  c,  p.  33. 

3  Merck,  /.  c,  xvii.  p.  65.  ■'Jukes,  /.  c,  vol.  i.  pp.  177,  274  (illus.). 

^  Day,  Niger,  p.  270.  ^  Albertis,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  97. 

''  Miklukha  Maklay,  /.  c,  p.  845.  *  Hein,  /.  c,  p.  114.  . 


INSTRUMENTS.  Ill 

beautiful  ornaments.^  Some  splendid  specimens  are  to  be 
found  in  Mexico;  the  "  tunkul  "  (drum  with  sheep  skin) 
in  South  Mexico,^  the  "  huehuetl  "  and  "  teponaztli  "  of  the 
Nahua  nations  are  curiosities  of  the  first  rank,  although 
of  course  not  quite  primitive  ones.^ 

It  is  not  always  an  artistic  purpose  that  the  drum  has 
to  serve.  Just  as  pipes,  whistles  or  flutes  are  used  to  call 
the  cattle,  or  the  fellow-hunters,  as  horns  are  used  to  give 
a  signal  to  the  warriors,  so  the  drum  in  many  instances 
merely  serves  a  practical  end.  The  M'balunda  negroes 
are  expert  in  distinguishing  the  drum  for  dancing 
(n'dungo)  and  for  war  purposes  (n'koko).^  With  the 
Wogago  and  Wanyamwezi  (between  Lakes  Victoria  and 
Tanganyika)  the  drum  often  calls  to  war.  They  celebrate 
the  arrival,  the  departure,  or  the  passing  through  of  a 
traveller  by  beating  the  drum.^ 

Native  carriers  would  never  take  a  burden  upon  their 
backs  unless  they  hear  the  drum  being  beaten,  which 
is  to  them  like  a  signal  of  permission  to  travel  with  the 
white  man.  With  the  Ashantis  music  is  the  horrible 
accompaniment  of  the  human  sacrifices  permitted  in  their 
country.  They  have  drums  of  an  enormous  size,  "  the 
entire  trunk  of  a  tree  being  hollowed  out  for  the  purpose," 
sounding  frightfully  in  the  night,  when  giving  the  signal 
for  new  sacrifices.  Their  fetish  drums  and  fetish  trumpets 
have  a  very  grotesque  appearance,  and  are  sometimes 
made  with  remarkable  ingenuity.''  On  Tahiti  the  largest 
of  their  drums  was  placed  in  front  of  the  temple ;  its  terrific 
sound,  when  beaten  at  midnight,  made  every  one  tremble 
with  fear  of  being  seized  as  the  victim  for  the  religious 
sacrifice.''     Drumming  is  also  taken  up  as  a   profession 


1  Hein,  /.  c,  pp.  113-116.  -  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  664. 

^  Ibid.,  ii.  p.  293.  •>  Soyaux,  ii.  pp.  175,  176. 

^  Wood,  i.  p.  432.  ^  Wood,  i.  p.  627  (illus.). 
''  Ellis,  Polyn.  Res.,  i.  p.  283. 


112  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

{e.g.,  all  along  the  Kworra,  Africa),  and. affords  a  livelihood 
to  numbers  of  men  at  each  village.^ 

Peculiar  to  Africa  is  the  custom  of  using  drums  as  a 
means  of  communication  from  great  distances.  There  are 
two  distinctly  different  kinds  of  this  drum  language,  based 
upon  different  principles.  The  first  kind  imitates  the 
sound  of  the  language,  as  is  shown  in  an  example  of 
Mr.  Schauenburg.  He  saw  at  Kujar  a  negro  beating 
the  drum  with  the  right  hand,  and  varying  the  tone  by 
pressing  his  left  on  the  skin,  so  as  to  imitate  the  sound 
of  the  Mandingo  words.  During  the  wrestling  match  it 
sounded  :  "  Amuta,  amuta  "  (attack)  ;  during  the  dance  : 
"AH  bae  si,"  and  all  the  participants  understood  it.-  I 
can  fancy  that  a  drum  can  fairly  well  reproduce  a  sound 
like  "  a '"  or  "  u  "  (pronounced  in  the  German  way),  but  it 
is  very  hard  to  imagine  the  drum  reproducing  the  "m" 
and  "  t '".  At  any  rate,  the  natives  understood  it,  perhaps 
by  the  aid  of  the  peculiar  rhythm  of  certain  words  or 
sentences,  so  important  in  primiti^■e  languages.  Sir  A.  C 
Moloney  observed  this  system  of  language  among  the 
Yorubas  (southern  neighbours  of  the  Nupes,  right  bank 
of  the  Niger,  4"  to  6'  longitude),  and  says  it  is  an 
imitation  of  the  human  voice  by  the  drum.  To  under- 
stand it  one  has  to  know  "  the  accents  or  pronunciation 
in  the  vernacular,  and  to  be  capable  of  recognising  the 
different  and  corresponding  note  of  the  drum  "."^ 

The  second  kind  of  drum  language  (among  the  Dwalla 
tribes)  is  based  entirely  upon  a  rhythmical  principle, 
but  not  upon  the  natural  rhythm  of  the  words,  but  a 
conventional  one,  by  means  of  which  the  natives  keep 
conversation  between  each  other  for  miles.  Not  only 
signals  are  given,  but  real  speeches  delivered.^  The 
natives  understand  this  language  as  a  modern  tele- 
graphist   understands    his    working    apparatus    without 

1  Day,  Niger,  p.  2  ff.  -  Schauenburg,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  93,  94- 

^  Moloney,  /.  c,  p.  609.  ■*  Buchner,  Kaincriin,  p.  37. 


INSTRUMENTS.  II3 

seeing  what  it  is  writing.  The  same  rhythm  can  also 
be  produced  by  the  mouth,  and  this  is  a  sort  of  secret 
language  used  especially  in  presence  of  a  white  man  who 
understands  the  ordinary  Dwalla.^ 

Another  mode  of  making  oneself  intelligible  by  means 
of  a  drum  is  the  fixed  drum  signal,  as  in  use  in  the  Unyan- 
yembe  country.^  It  is  doubtful  whether  in  Bondei  and 
East  Usumbara  (German  East  Africa)  the  natives  have  a 
real  drum  language  or  only  a  highly  developed  drum 
signalling.  They  give  the  signals  on  the  "  Vilangwe  ". 
This  consists  of  two  parallel  banana  trunks  over  which 
pieces  of  wood  are  laid  crosswise  and  played  with  sticks.^ 

Every  large  country  in  Africa  has  its  own  style  of 
drumming ;  Grant  observed  that  the  drumming  of  Unyan- 
yembe  was  more  musical  than  the  jumble  of  drums  in 
Ukumi.  The  conductor  had  always  the  largest  drum  ;  the 
rest  watched  him  for  the  time,  while  at  his  feet  a  little 
black  youth  rattled  as  hard  as  he  could  :  if  ceasing  the 
music  would  have  lost  its  stirring  effect.*  Mr.  Buchner 
tells  us  that  the  drummer  in  Kamerun  does  not  beat  the 
time,  but  a  perpetual  roll,  the  time  being  marked  by  the 
songs  of  the  lookers-on.^  The  Madi  tribes  beat  the  drum 
with  one  stick.*^  The  Camma  tribes,  which  have  perhaps 
the  most  noisy  music  of  all  the  African  peoples,  beat  the 
drum  with  immense  energy  and  disproportionate  noise  ; 
at  the  same  time  they  hang  a  row  of  brass  kettles  on 
poles  and  bang   them  with    sticks.^     During  the  happy 

1  This  secret  language  has  been  hivented  because  the  savages  were  afraid 
of  the  white  man  in  consequence  of  bad  experiences  they  had  had.  Mr. 
Buchner  often  observed  {Still.  Ozcan.,  p.  274)  how  the  most  stupid  and 
wretched  European  sailor  considered  it  his  duty  to  threaten  the  black  man 
like  a  beast.  The  most  striking  case  occurred  in  Madagascar,  where  the 
white  men  behaved  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  taken  for  cannibals  (!)  by  the 
"  savages"  (Rochon,  /.  c.  Germ,  edit.,  p.  78). 

-Grant,  /.  c,  p.  103.  ^  Baumann,  Usumbara,  pp.  136-137. 

■*  Grant,  I.  c,  p.  103.  ^  Buchner,  Kaiii.,  p.  29. 

«  Wood,  i.  p.  480.  ''  Wood,  i.  p.  567.     (Rembo  River.) 


114  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

palm-wine  season  all  the  natives,  including  the  king  him- 
self, are  in  various  stages  of  intoxication,  just  as  certain 
civilised  nations  on  like  occasions,  the  king,  of  course, 
excepted.^  The  Apono  (Ogowe  R.)  gently  tap  the  drum  with 
their  fingers  ;  so  do  the  Hottentots  and  the  natives  of  the 
Society  Islands,"  the  islands  along  the  West  Torres  Straits,^ 
and  the  Ashantis  with  their  small  drums.'*  The  Mala- 
gasy,^ Balonda,**  and  Angola  tribes  south  of  the  Congo 
mouth,'''  and  the  natives  in  Tahiti  ^  play  it  with  the  palm 
of  their  hand.  The  Cammas  sit  down  or  kneel  when 
playing  the  drum,'^  the  Ashantis  carry  the  war  drum 
on  their  heads  and  have  it  beaten  by  another  man 
behind;  again,  the  Bafiote  hold  their  drum  "  ndunga "' 
between  the  legs,^°  the  Tibbu  and  Fezzan  (North  Africa) 
play  it  with  the  hand  on  one  side  and  with  a  stick  on  the 
other.^^ 

The  Balonda  drum  has  a  small  square  hole  in  the  side 
covered  with  a  piece  of  yellow  spider's  web  of  wonderful 
toughness  and  elasticity.  This  allows  the  escape  of  air 
and  has  a  resonant  effect  at  the  same  time.  This  custom 
of  using  the  spider's  web  prevails  through  a  ver\-  large 
portion  of  Africa.^- 

It  is  not  always  the  rhythm  alone  which  has  to  be 
marked  by  the  drum.  In  some  cases  the  drummer  is  very 
careful  in  getting  a  peculiar  note  which  he  varies  during 
the  performance.  The  "  nkonko  "  drum  of  the  Bafiote 
(looking  like  a  small  canoe  closed  at  the  upper  end  leaving 
only  a  small  slit  free)  has  on  each  side  of  this  slit  different 
tones. ^^     The  Balonda  tune  the  drums  by  holding  them 

1  Wood,  i.  p.  542  (illust.).  -Ibid.,  ii.  p.  404. 

^  Haddon,  /.  c,  WiSt  Torr.  St.,  p.  375. 

■*  Beecham,  /.  c,  p.  16S.  ^  Ellis,  Madag.,  i.  p.  273. 

''Livingstone,  /.  c,  p.  293.  (Bantu  group.) 

^  Angelo-Carli,  /.  c,  p.  160.  *  Cook,  First  Voyage,  ii.  p.  205. 

"^  Wood,  i.  p.  567.  1"  Guessfeldt,  /.  c,  p.  76. 

'1  Lyon,  /.  c,  p.  234.  '-Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  414. 
^■^  Guessfeldt,  /.  c,  p.  129. 


INSTRUMENTS.  II5 

to  the  fire/  the  Hottentots  by  pressing  the  fingers  on  the 
skin.  On  Tahiti  the  natives  know  how  to  tune  two 
drums  of  different  notes  into  concord.' 

Drums  are  often  played  en  cnseuible.  When  the  chief 
of  the  Bashilange  received  the  European  travellers  he 
was  accompanied  in  his  movements  by  a  great  drum  with 
a  splendid  bass  tone.  When  he  declared  friendship  four 
well-tuned  drums  began  to  play,  while  the  assembly  sang 
a  melody  of  seven  tones,  repeating  it  several  times.^  In 
the  house  of  the  Prince  of  Zebu  (Philippines)  four  girls, 
entirely  naked,  played  drums,  kettle-drums  and  cymbals 
(of  metal  or  bronze)  in  a  harmonious  manner.*  During 
the  ceremonies  after  new  moon  the  Karagwes  played  on 
thirty-three  drums,  all  arranged  in  one  row.*"  On  the 
Marquesas  Islands  the  natives  produced  a  terrific  noise 
with  an  "  army  of  drums,"  formed  of  the  hollow  trunk 
of  large  trees,  at  least  fifteen  feet  in  height.  Behind 
these  instruments  were  built  slight  platforms,  upon  which 
stood  a  number  of  young  men,  beating  violently  with  the 
palms  of  their  hands  upon  the  drum  heads.  Every  few 
minutes  the  performers  hopped  down,  and  were  replaced 
by  fresh  recruits.*"  In  speaking  of  the  army  of  Dutugai- 
munu  (Ceylon),  the  Rajavali  says  that  in  the  march  the 
rattling  of  the  sixty-four  kinds  of  drums  made  a  noise 
resembling  thunder  breaking  on  the  rock  from  which  the 
sun  rises.  The  band  of  Devenipiatissa,  B.C.  307,  was 
called  the  talawachara,  from  the  great  number  of  drums ; 
"the  triumph  of  effect  consisted  in  the  united  crash  of 
every  description  of  sound,  vocal  as  well  as  instrumental". 
Although  a  full  band  is  explained  in  the  Mahawanso  to 
imply  a  combination  of  "  all  descriptions  of  musicians," 
no  flutes  or  wind  instruments  are  particularised,  and  the 


1  Livingstone,  /.  c,  p.  293.  -  Cook,  First  Voyage,  ii.  p.  205. 

3  Wissmann,  First  Voyage,  p.  72.      *  Pigafetta,  /.  c,  p.  337. 

5  Grant,  /.  c,  pp.  184-185.  "^  Melville,  /.  e.,  pp.  184-186. 


Il6  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

incidental  mention  of  a  harp  only  occurs  in  the  reign  of 
Dutugaimunu,  B.C.   i6i.^ 

Some  of  those  drums  with  different  tones  might  equally 
well  be  called  kettle-drums,  for  it  is  hardly  possible  to 
distinguish  both  instruments  according  to  modern  ideas. 
Kettle-drums  especially  are  mentioned  with  the  Kimbunda 
(West  Africa),  whose  instrument,  longoma,  is  to  be  heard 
for  miles."  Kettle-drums  and  tambourines  occur  among 
the  Makalaka,^  and  in  Morocco,  where  the  kettle-drum 
(ganga)  is  beaten  with  a  knot  tied  in  a  rope;*  the  Karagwe 
have  kettle-drums  of  copper,^  the  natives  on  the  Island  of 
Saleyer  kettle-drums  of  bronze  with  beautiful  ornaments  ;  '^ 
again,  in  Cuba  kettle-drums  were  in  use  covered  with 
human  skin.'^  The  "  Keeloun  "  of  the  Eskimos  is  some- 
thing like  a  tambourine,  "  being  formed  of  a  very  thin  deer 
skin,  or  the  envelope  of  the  whale's  liver,  stretched  over 
one  side  of  a  wooden  hoop.  A  handle  is  attached  to  the 
hoop,  and  the  instrument  is  struck  with  a  stick,  not  upon 
the  membrane,  but  upon  the  hoop."^ 

(>!•)    THE  MARIMBA. 

One  of  the  most  characteristic  instruments  of  savage 
races  is  the  marimba.  It  is  taken  by  some  writers  as  the 
original  of  our  piano,  although  the  resemblance  is  very 
slight  as  far  as  the  construction  is  concerned,  while  its 
tone  is  pretty  similar  to  that  of  our  piano.*^  It  consists  of 
a  number  of  gourds  (as  many  as  sixteen)  covered  with  a 
flat  piece  of  wood,  beaten  with  a  stick,  and  produces 
different  tones  according  to  the  size  of  the  gourd.  Ac- 
cording to  Wood  it  has  been  brought  to  England  under 
the   name   of  xylophon.^*'     For  a  time  it  was  commonly 

1  Tennent,  /.  c,  i.  p.  471  (illus.).  -  Magyar,  /.  c,  p.  311. 

'^  Mauch,  /.  c,  p.  43.  ^  Nachtigal,  /.  c,  i.  p.  745. 

5  Grant,  /.  c,  pp.  184-185.  '^  A.  B.  Meyer,  /.  c,  iv.  table  16. 

''  Waitz,  /.  c,  iv.  p.  325.  *  Wood,  ii.  p.  719. 

•''  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  664.  ^^  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  392. 


INSTRUMENTS.  II7 

supposed  to  be  of  American  origin,  until  recent  expeditions 
brought  the  same  instrument  back  from  Africa.  It  seems  to 
have  been  overlooked  that  the  marimba  is  mentioned  as  an 
African  instrument  as  early  as  in  the  seventeenth  century.^ 

We  find  the  marimba  in  use  among  the  Manganja  and 
Batokar  all  the  Congo  people,^  the  Mandingoes,^  Kim- 
bunda'^  (with  fifteen  calabashes),  the  Fans  (with  seven 
tones,  "hunju"),*^  in  Mussumba,^  all  over  East  Africa,^ 
among  the  M'balunda  negroes,'-^  and  the  Bashislange  (or 
Mushislange,  or  Tushislange,  or  Kashislange),^''  in  South 
Mexico, ^^  and  with  the  North  American  Indians.  Mr. 
Froebel  saw  at  Telica  an  improved  marimba,  the  con- 
struction of  which  had  evidently  been  influenced  by 
Europeans.  Instead  of  gourds  or  calabash  shells  they 
made  use  of  wood'en  tubes,  and  had  steel  instead  of 
wooden  flats.  To  produce  the  music  the  musician  had  a 
stick  of  elastic  wood  in  each  hand,  and  while  playing  on  it 
he  became  more  and  more  excited,  till  at  last  he  fell  into 
a  kind  of  musical  frenzy,  his  hands  flying  so  quickly  above 
each  other  that  the  eyes  could  scarcely  follow  them.  One 
might  almost  fancy  that  Froebel  was  describing  a  modern 
pianist.^"" 

There  are  several  varieties  of  the  marimba,  e.g.,  the 
mandida,  i.e.,  a  marimba  without  sounding-boards,^^  the 
"kas"  of  the  Angola  (Africa),  i.e.,  a  basket  of  the  stock 
of  the  palmetto  tree,  carved  in  flowers  and  covered  with  a 
board.^^  Mr.  Heuglin  saw  at  Chief  Mofio's  court  some 
blind  musicians  playing  a  very  complicated  instrument 
made  from   the   leaves   of  bananas,  and   a  sort  of  "  har- 

•  Carli,  /.  c,  p.  160  ;  MeroUa,  /.  c,  p.  245. 

-  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  392.  ^  Johnston,  Congo,  p.  433. 

^  M.  Park,  /.  c,  p.  878.  ^  Magyar,  /.  c,  i.  p.  311  (illust.). 

«  Du  Chaillu,  Equ.  Afr.,  pp.  87,  88  (illust.). 

"  Pogge,  /.  c,  p.  241.  ^  Cameron,  /.  c,  p.  267  (illust.). 

•'  Soyaux,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  175-176.  i"  VVissmann,  Second  Voyage-,  p.  306. 

^*  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  664.  i-'  Froebel,  I.  c,  i.  p.  323. 

'■'  Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  865.  i-"  Astlcy  Collect.,  iii.  p.  274. 


Il8  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

monica,"  similar  to  the  marimba.  It  was  a  long  stick  to 
which  cross  booms  were  attached,  decreasing  in  length, 
and  with  clay  vessels  at  the  end,  which  were  beaten  with 
small  wooden  hammers.^  A  sort  of  marimba  is  evidently 
the  balafoa  (orbalafen,  or  ballard)  of  the  Mandingoes,  con- 
sisting of  seventeen  wooden  keys  with  two  gourds  on  each 
of  them  hanging  down  like  bottles.  The  keys  are  beaten 
with  sticks.^  A  balafoa  without  gourds  and  played  with  a 
notch  stick  is  to  be  found  in  West  Africa.^  Similar  to  the 
marimba  is  the  "  toztze  "  or  "  igedegbo  "  in  the  Niger 
territories,  formed  of  a  wooden  box  instead  of  gourds.* 

The  marimba  is  often  played  en  ensemble,  and,  strange 
enough,  we  find  not  unfrequently  a  regular  quartette  of 
marimbas,  or  marimbas  and  other  instruments.  Among  the 
Angola  four  marimbas  form  a  concert.^  Livingstone  saw 
a  marimba  quartette  combined  with  three  drums  ;  ^  in  other 
cases  it  is  combined  with  two  "  cassuto  ".  The  latter  is 
a  hollow  piece  of  wood  about  a  yard  long,  covered  with  a 
board  cut  like  a  ladder.  Running  a  stick  along  it  gives  a 
sound  within  w^hich  passes  for  a  tenor.  The  bass  to  this 
concert  is  the  quilando,  made  of  a  very  large  calabash, 
two  spans  and  a  half  to  three  in  length,  very  large  at  one 
end,  and  ending  sharp  off  at  the  other.  Mr.  Merolla 
says  of  this  concert  :  "  The  harmony  is  grateful  at  a 
distance  but  harsh  near  at  hand".^  I  am  afraid  that  all 
the  African  music  is  intended  for  great  distance  only.  In 
Guatemala  several  marimbas  play  together  in  perfect  accord 
with  some  song.^'* 

(/)   THE  GOURA 
(or  gflitrah,  goriah,  gorah). 

Savage  tribes  of  South  Africa  have  an  instrument  which 
has    neither    been    introduced    into    other    countries    nor 

1  Heuglin,  Wdssci-  Nil,  p.  216.  -  Astlcy  Collect.,  ii.  p.  278  (illust.). 

•■'  Corry,  /.  c,  p.  154.  *  Day,  Niger,  p.  271. 

■"'  Merolla,  /.  c,  p.  244.  ^  Livingstone,  /.  c,  p.  293. 

"  Merolla,  /.  c,  p.  245.  ^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  705. 


INSTRUMENTS.  II9 

modified  in  anv  way  by  the  influence  of  culture.  It  is  the 
goura.  The  goura  is  an  instrument  in  shape  Hke  the  bow 
of  a  double  bass,  with  a  cat-gut  to  which  a  small  piece  of 
quill  is  attached.  The  player  takes  the  quill  in  his  mouth 
and  by  strong  inspirations  and  respirations  makes  the  cat- 
gut vibrate,  thus  producing  a  few  soft  notes.  The  natives 
sit  down  if  they  play,  grasp  the  bow  in  the  middle  with 
the  right  hand,  and  strike  the  string  in  several  places  with 
a  small  stick  five  or  six  inches  in  length,  which  they  hold 
in  the  other  hand  ;  one  forefinger  is  put  into  the  player's 
ear  and  the  other  into  his  wide  nostril  very  likely  in  order 
to  increase  the  sound  for  the  player,  for  this  sound  is  so 
soft  that  it  cannot  be  heard  at  all  beyond  a  certain  distance.^ 
The  natives  seldom  succeed  in  playing  a  regular  melody 
on  the  goura  ;  it  is  only  a  change  of  the  same  tones  long 
protracted,  the  principal  tone  being  struck  before  every 
tune.  These  tunes,  however,  are  only  the  effect  of  chance.^ 
The  instrument  produces  but  five  tones,  the  principal  tone, 
its  octave,  and  three  tones  between,  evidently  the  open 
notes  of  every  wind  instrument,  although  not  properly  in 
tune.  AMien  several  gouras  play  together  they  are  never 
in  unison,  and  the  instrument  only  emits  certain  twangs, 
like  those  drawn  in  a  particular  manner  from  a  violin.^ 
Burchell  compares  the  tone  of  the  goura  with  a  "  grunting 
sound  which  would  have  highly  pleased  the  pigs ;  and  if 
any  had  been  in  the  country,  it  would  indubitably  have 
drawn  them  all  round  the  player,  if  only  out  of  curiosity 
to  know  what  was  the  matter".  Mr.  Fritsch,  too,  calls 
the  goura  a  terrible  instrument  which  is  "  maltreated  in 
a  nerve-shaking  manner  "'."* 


1  Moffat,  /.  c,  p.  58  ;  Burchell,  /.  c,  i.  p.  458;  Lichtenstein,  /.  c,  ii.  p. 
379;  Michaelis,  p.  528. 
-  Elson,  /.  c,  p.  257. 
^  Moodie,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  226. 
^  Fritsch,  Eingcb.,  p.  427. 


120  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

(w)   THE  JEW'S  HARP.i 

We  need  hardly  give  a  detailed  description  of  the 
instrument  which  in  its  most  primitive  form  is  still  in  use 
among  civilised  nations.  Among  savage  races  we  can 
follow  it  in  the  Niger  territories  (called  "to"),-  on  the 
Society  Islands,^  New  Britain  and  the  York  Islands/  the 
Fiji  Islands ;  °  among  the  Tingianes  (North  Luzon, 
Philippine  Islands)*^  and  the  Manegres  on  the  Upper 
Amur  '^  (by  these  made  of  latten-plate  and  called 
"  kamuti  ").  The  Jew's  harp  has  become  national  with 
the  Mapuches  (Araucanians),  as  much  so  as  the  guitar 
with  the  Spaniards,  and  no  young  gallant  is  considered 
fully  equipped  and  provisioned  to  lay  siege  to  a  lady's 
heart  if  unprovided  with  a  Jew's  harp.  They  play  it 
almost  entireh-  by  inhaling  instead  of  exhaling,  and  have 
ways  of  expressing  various  emotions  by  different  modes  of 
playing,  which  the  Araucanian  damsels  appreciate.^ 

Mr.  Brown  does  not  take  the  Jew's  harp  for  a  primitive 
instrument,  because  the  traveller  Mr.  Finsch,  who  once 
asked  for  the  instrument  "  pagolo,"  got  the  answer : 
"  No  more  pagolo  ;  pagolo  die,  the  Jew's  harp  make  him 
kill  ".'^  This  example,  however,  only  proves  what  it 
strictl}-  says,  i.e.,  that  in  this  particular  instance  the 
pagolo  was  replaced  by  the  Jew's  harp.  Moreover,  Finsch 
himself  describes  the  pagolo  as  a  bow  with  a  string, 
whose  one  end  is  put  into  the  mouth,  while  the  string  is 
pressed  by  the  thumb  of  the  left  and  struck  with  a  stick  in 
the  right. i'^ 

'  I  mention  Mr.  Pennant's  suggestion  that  it  ought  to  be  spelt  jaw's 
harp  {Pinker ton  Collect.,  iii.  p.  95). 

'-  Day,  Niger,  p.  269.  ^  Wood.  /.  c.,  ii.  p.  404. 

■*  Powell,  /.  c,  p.  73.  5  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  141. 

"  A.  B.  Meyer,  /.  c.,  viii.  table  17  (illust.). 

^  Andree,  Amur,  p.  173.  »  E.  R.  Smith,  /.  c,  p.  247. 

^  Brown,  /.  c.,  p.  237. 
^"  Finsch,  Erfahrg.  Sitdsee,  ii.  p.  2,  122  (illust.). 


INSTRUMENTS.  121 

(//)  THE  GUITAR,  ZITHER,  HARP,  MANDOLINE,  LUTE,  BANJO,  LYRA. 

In  this  class  some  confusion  is  hardly  avoidable  in 
applying  the  correct  names  to  the  instruments,  as  the 
majority  of  travellers  were  not  careful  enough  in  distin- 
guishing a  guitar  from  a  harp  or  mandoline,  the  speci- 
mens used  by  savage  races  being  so  different  in  shape 
from  the  corresponding  modern  instruments.^  Of  course, 
where  a  detailed  description  of  the  instrument  is  given  we 
may  easily  correct  inappropriate  terms.  Where,  however, 
the  instruments  are  not  accurately  enough  described,  we 
will  simply  follow  the  original  terminolog}'. 

The  name  guitar  is  most  frequently  mentioned.  The 
Dor  have  three  different  kinds  of  this  instrument ;  one  can  be 
tuned  by  means  of  a  ring  passed  over  the  neck  which  can 
be  slipped  up  or  down  ;  besides  this,  however,  the  notes 
cannot  be  altered  by  pressure  of  the  fingers  upon  the  string. 
This  reminds  us  of  the  principle  of  the  harp,  while  the 
large  body  of  it  resembles  the  modern  guitar.  In  fact,  the 
instruments  are  something  between  a  harp  and  guitar.- 
The  Bunda  people  have  a  guitar  "  nsambi,"  with  strings 
made  of  the  thread  of  palm  trees,  and  played  with  the 
thumbs,^  the  Karagwe  a  guitar  "  nanga "  with  seven  to 
eight  strings  ;  six  of  the  seven  notes  are  a  perfect  scale 
(diatonic?),  the  seventh  being  the  only  faulty  string;  in 
another  three  strings  were  a  full  harmonious  chord,* 
Similar  to  it  is  the  "para,"  very  likely  of  ancient  Egyptian 
origin."^  The  Hottentots  have  the  "  rabekin,"  a  guitar 
with  three  to  four  strings,  tuned  by  screws, "^  another 
"  gabowie  "  with  three  strings  over  a  hollow  piece  of  wood 
with  a  lonjr  handle  ;  ^  the  Mandingoes  a  ffuitar  "  hunting" 


'  On  the  difference  between  these  instruments  compare  Hipkin's  mas- 
terly Lecture  "  Mus.  Instr.,"  /.  c. 

-  Tuckey,  /.  c,  p.  373.  -^  Merolla,  /.  c,  p.  245. 

■*  Grant,  /.  c,  p.  183.  ^  p^y,  Niger,  p.  266. 

•>  Thunberg,  /.  c,  p.  go.  "  Barrow,  /.  c,  i.  p.  149. 

8  M.  Park,  /.  c,  p.  878. 


122  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

"  kilara  "  made  of  huge  calabashes  (details  not  given). ^ 
The  Ashantis  have  the  most  perfect  guitar  (lanku).  The 
instrument  is  a  hollow  wooden  box  perforated  with  holes 
and  covered  with  a  skin,  to  which  a  long  stick  or  neck  is 
attached  ;  it  has  eight  strings,  in  two  rows,  supported  per- 
pendicularly by  a  bridge;  it  produces  a  soft  soothing  tone."^ 
The  Malagasy  have  a  guitar  with  two  strings.^  The 
common  guitar,  or  rather  "zither,"  of  the  negroes,  called 
"  sansa,"  is  to  be  found  among  all  the  negro  tribes.  Mr. 
Pogge  saw  it  with  the  Kalunda  at  Mussumba.  Only  pro- 
fessional musicians  play  it,  and  they  have  certain  composi- 
tions which  they  always  repeat."^ 

The  Kavans  of  Baram  have  a  guitar  with  two  strings 
of  the  fine  threads  of  rattan  twisted  and  drawn  up  tightly 
b\-  means  of  tuning  keys.^  On  the  Upper  Amazon  there 
is  a  wire  guitar;*^  on  the  Molucca  Island  a  guitar  is  made 
of  bamboo,  the  fibres  of  which  are  cut  out  and  a  bridge 
put  under  in  the  middle,  while  the  ends  are  left  in  the 
bamboo.'  On  the  same  principle  is  made  the  guitar 
"valitra,"  in  Madagascar,  on  which  short  monotonous 
melodies  are  played;  the  guitar  "lokango"  is  louder  in 
tone.^ 

The  Mrung  tribes  (India)  have  a  guitar,  "  pankho," 
with  one  string  over  a  hollow  gourd  attached  to  a  bamboo 
tube;  the  Magh  tribes  a  bamboo  "zither,"  the  strings  of 
which  are  of  reed  fibres  stretched  over  a  wooden  bridge.'* 
The  Kamchadales  have  a  three-cornered  guitar,  "  cella- 
lika,"  with  two  strings,  and  rude  violins,  products  of  their 
domestic  industry.^^      A  guitar  of  the  Ginnaanes  (North 

^  Corry,  /.  c,  p.  154.  -  Beecham,  /.  f.,  p.  i6g. 

•^  A.  Schulz,  /.  f.,  p.  192. 

^  Pogge,  Miiata  Jatiiwo,  p.  241  ;   Ratzel,  /.  c,  p.  54. 
'  St.  John,  /.  c,  i.  p.  118.  "  Bates,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  203. 

"  Bastian,  hidon.,  table  i,  Liefg.  i.         *  Ellis,  Madagascar,  i.  p.  273. 
^  Riebeck,    Hi'igchtcimmc,  table   15  ;    "  Indian    Instrum.,"    see    Riebeck, 
Sammliiiig,  table  4. 

"  Kennan,  /.  c,  p.  162. 


INSTRUMENTS.  I23 

Luzon,  Philippine  Islands)  is  mentioned  and  illustrated 
by  Meyer.^ 

The  Ost}'aks  have  two  stringed  instruments  (inven- 
tions of  their  own),  one  with  strings,  called  "  dombra  "  (the 
name  is  said  to  be  akin  to  the  tombora  of  the  Magyars), 
another  with  eight  strings,  called  "naruista  juch  chotuing" 
(chotuing  =  swanJ.  In  Russian  folk-songs  the  comparison 
of  instruments  with  aquatic  birds  frequently  occurs, 
particularly  in  the  bride-songs.^  The  swan  especially  is 
considered  to  have  the  most  silvery  voice  of  all  animals  ; 
even  the  Chinese  goose,  "  ritais  roi  gus,"  is  called 
"  swonroi,"  i.e.,  possessing  a  beautiful  voice.  Mr.  Erman 
supposes  that  the  Russian  harp,  "  gusli,"  has  its  name 
from  "gus"  (goose),  like  the  chotuing  of  the  Ostyaks 
from  swan.^  I  may  mention  that  in  Slavonian,  too, 
"  husa  "  means  goose,  and  "  husle  "  a  violin. 

A  peculiar  instrument  is  the  harp  of  the  Kafirs.  It 
is  sometimes  called  guitar  or  fiddle  ;  in  fact,  it  is  a  bow 
with  a  hair  string  which  can  be  tightened  by  means  of  a 
ring.  Near  one  end  of  the  bow  a  round  hollow  gourd  is 
firmly  lashed  by  means  of  leathern  thongs.  The  cord  is 
struck  with  a  stick,  and  the  instrument  produces  tones 
scarcely  audible  at  some  distance.  "  It  is  intended  for 
time  rather  than  tune."  ^  This  simple  bow  seems  to  be 
the  original  of  all  the  stringed  instruments,  from  which  the 
goura  and  perhaps  also  the  Jew's  harp  is  developed  ;  Mr. 
Andersson  at  least  called  the  bow  a  sort  of  rude  Jew's 
harp,'"'  and  the  mode  of  playing  the  latter  is  very  similar 
to  that  of  the  goura.  The  n-kungu  in  Angola  is  a  bow 
like  the  Kafir's  harp,  tightened  by  means  of  a  thread 
instead  of  a  ring.  The  bow  is  a  curved  whip,  and  the 
string    is    a    plant    fibre.'"'       Another    similar    instrument 

1  A.  B.  Meyer,  /.  c,  viii.  table  7.  -Erman,  /.  c,  p.  520. 

5  Ibid.,  i.  I,  p.  671.  ^  Wood,  /.  c.  i.  p.  231. 

■'' C.  J.  Andersson,  Ngatni,  p.  230. 
^  Shooter,  /.  c,  p.  236  scq. ;  Soyaux,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  177. 


124  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

is  the  bow  of  the  Damaras.  They  tie  a  piece  of  reim 
round  the  bow-string  and  the  handle  and  bind  them  tight 
together,  then  they  hold  the  bow  horizontally  against 
their  teeth,  and  strike  the  tense  bow-string  with  a  small 
stick.  They  attend  more  to  the  rhythm  than  the  notes, 
and  imitate  with  its  music  the  gallop  or  trotting  of 
different  animals  to  perfection.^ 

The  harps  of  savage  races  have  in  their  most  primitive 
form  an  almost  funny  appearance.  The  harps  of  the 
Bakalai,-  with  eight  strings,  of  the  Niam-Niam,^  and  of 
the  Kroo  negroes*  are  examples.  The  former  consists  of 
a  triangle  of  sticks  (the  strings  between)  unequal  in  length, 
the  longest  being  put  into  a  gourd.  The  Akelle  (Ogowe  R.) 
are  said  to  be  famous  for  their  beautiful  harps,  which  Mr. 
Lenz  mentions,  without,  however,  describing  them  ;  ^  the 
Mandingoes  have  a  harp,  "korro,"  with  eighteen  strings, 
and  another,  "simbing,"  with  seven  strings;"  in  Guinea 
there  is  a  harp  with  six  to  seven  reeds,  on  which  the 
natives  play  "very  finely";^  among  the  Moors  there  is 
one  with  fourteen  strings  of  sheep  gut.^  The  natives  of 
Guiana  had  a  sort  of  ^'Eolian  harp,  formed  from  the  leaf- 
stalk of  the  aita  palm,  the  parallel  fibres  of  which  are 
separated,  and  a  bridge  placed  under  ;  then  the  whole 
instrument  is  fastened  upright  in  some  exposed  place, 
and  the  wind  passing  through  the  strings  causes  a  soft 
musical  sound.'*  The  Zuiiians  (South  Mexico)  have  a 
whizzer,  which  the}-  twirl  during  the  dance.  It  is  a  flat 
stick  with  a  string  which,  when  whirled  about  in  a  circle, 
gives  a  peculiar  sound.  It  is  found  among  American 
tribes  as  well  as  among  the  Australians  (called  "  turndun  " 
or  bribbun),  in   New  Zealand,  Zululand,  and  West  Africa. 

^  Gallon,  Travels,  p.  117;  Andersson,  /.  c,  p.  230. 

-  Ratzel,  i.  p.  618.  -^  Ibid.,  p.  534. 

'^  Ibid.,  p.  618.  •'  Lenz,  Skizzcn,  p.  2S6. 

•>  M.  Park,  /.  c,  p.  878.  ''  Bosman,  /.  c,  p.  530. 

'^  Caillie,  /.  c,  i.  p.  95.  "  Im  Thurn,  /.  c,  p.  309. 


INSTRUMENTS.  125 

In  Australia  it  is  used  to  warn  the  people  from  the 
dance  ;  the  Zuiiians,  however,  use  it  simply  to  imitate  the 
wind.  The  instrument  is  carried  by  the  Koy-e-a-mashi, 
a  very  old  organisation  among  the  Zunians,  and  borne 
by  the  Zuni  mythological  personage,  Pan-ti-va.^ 

The  inandoUne,  "  dourou,"  is  a  favourite  instrument 
in  Dahomey.  A  proverb  says  of  it :  "  Vous  n'avez  pas 
encore  entendu  resonner  le  dourou,  et  deja  vous  danser 
gaiement  ".-  The  mandoline  of  the  Niam-Niam  has  five 
strings,  which  can  be  tuned  by  means  of  screws,'^ 

On  the  Lower  Congo  there  are  lutes  with  strings 
of  an  elephant  tail  or  threads  of  palm  trees.  By  playing 
upon  them  the  natives  are  said  "to  express  their  mind 
almost  as  intelligibly  as  with  their  tongues  ".*  At  Fort 
St.  Louis  the  natives  sing  to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
lute.5 

In  New  Britain  and  the  York  Islands  the  natives 
have  a  primitive  banjo  with  two  strings  on  a  flat  piece  of 
bamboo,  fastened  across  a  sort  of  drum.  This  banjo,  as 
well  as  their  fifes,  pan-pipes,  Jew's  harps,  are  to  be  seen 
in  any  village,  only  the  larger  drums  are  carefully  hidden, 
belonging  especially  to  the  chiefs.*^ 

The  Maoris  in  New  Zealand  have  a  lyre  with  three 
to  four  strings.''  On  the  Congo  there  is  one  with  five 
strings.^  Old  Egyptian  lyres  had  four  to  eighteen  strings,^ 
and  are  to  be  met  with  as  early  as  at  the  time  of  Ameno- 
phis  I.  (about  3000  years  ago).^*^ 

Mr.  Rowbotham  objects  to  the  bow  being  considered  the 
first  string  instrument,  and  the  lyre  being  developed  from 


1  Fewkes,  Sum.  Cereiii.,  p.  23,  note  i ;  cf.  A.  Lang,  Ciisf.  and  Myth,  pp. 
28-44 ;  Myth.  Rit.  Rel,  i.  p.  284. 

-Bouche,  I.  c,  p.  96.  ^Heuglin,  /.  c,  p.  216. 

*Astley  Collect.,  iii.  p.  249.  ^  BriJe,  /.  c,  p.  48. 

"  Powell,  /.  c,  p.  73.  "  Dumont  d'Urville,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  446. 
8  Johnston,  /.  c,  p.  434  (illus.).  "  Wilkinson,  /.  c,  i.  p.  475. 

"  Ibid.,  p.  477. 


126  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

it,  for,  he  says,  the  New  Zealanders  do  not  use  bows  as 
weapons  and  yet  possess  the  h're.  Rowbotham  takes  the 
Jew's  harp  for  the  original  of  the  lyre.  Unfortunately  the 
New  Zealanders  have  no  Jew's  harp  either.  Meanwhile 
Mr.  Tylor  has  pronounced  the  hunting-bow  as  the  origin 
of  stringed  instruments  (/.  c,  p.  184).  The  Damaras  at 
least  use  the  bow  for  the  double  purpose  of  hunting  and 
twanging. 

(o)   THE   VIOLIN. 

Were  the  origin  of  bowed  instruments  to  be  called  in 
question,  the  first  thing  to  be  explained  would  be  the 
peculiar  custom  of  producing  tone  by  "stroking"  as 
opposed  to  percussion  or  wind.  The  Bawili  in  Loango 
have  a  very  primitive  instrument — simply  a  notched  stick 
planted  lirmly  against  some  fixed  object  and  stroked  along 
in  strict  time.  It  is  played  in  the  hut  in  which  the 
maiden,  N-Kumbi,  is  made  familiar  with  the  secrets  of 
matrimony.^  In  Louisiana  the  jaw-bone  of  a  mule  is 
rubbed  with  sticks,^  and  in  Zuni  Pueblo  two  sticks  are 
rubbed  together."^  In  New  Zealand  pieces  of  wood  which 
produce  tones  when  rubbed  with  the  hands  are  common.* 
In  New  Britain  there  is  an  instrument,  called  kulepa- 
ganeg,  consisting  of  a  round  thick  piece  of  wood  with 
three  notches  (wider  at  the  bottom).  It  is  stroked  with 
the  wet  palms  of  the  hand  and  gives  three  different  tones.^ 
Mr.  Finsch,  who  describes  the  instrument,  seems,  how- 
ever, to  be  mistaken,  if  he  calls  it  "  unique  in  the  world  ". 
The  above  jaw-bone  instrument  is  similar,  and  still  more 
similar  is  the  instrument  charra  or  kwatscha  in  Usum- 
bara  (East  Africa).  It  is  a  solid  piece  of  wood  over  which 
a  notched  stick  is  slightly  bent.  Along  this  stick  another 
is  stroked.     The  sound  is  of  so  wonderful  effect  that  in 

^  Soyaux,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  175-176.  -  Fortier,  /.  c,  p.  137. 

^  Fewkes,  Sum.  Cerem.,  p.  37.  ■*  Ratzel,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  228. 

■^  Finsch,  Erfahrg.  Sildscc,  iii.  2,  p.  140. 


INSTRUMENTS.  I27 

comparison  with  it — as  Mr.  Baumann  said — wood-sawing 
must  be  called  harmon}-.^  Thus  the  idea  of  producing 
tone  by  rubbing  or  stroking — i.e.,  a  sort  of  primitive 
fiddling — is  not  unkno\vn  among  savage  races,  and  we 
may  easily  imagine  how  a  stick  or  bow  furnished  with  a 
plant  fibre  may  have  been  subjected  to  similar  treatment, 
without  taking  into  further  consideration  the  connection 
with  the  above-mentioned  ceremony.  As  a  matter  of  fact 
this  stroking  or  rubbing  of  a  stick  by  means  of  a  bow  often 
occurs  ;  the  Damaras  hold  the  leather  string  of  their  bows 
in  their  teeth  and  play  on  it  with  a  stick, ^  while  the 
Patagonians  play  their  flutes  with  a  bow.  Among  them 
the  flute  is  used  as  a  kind  of  sound-post,^  which  obviously 
sounds  better  than  the  stick,  and  is  stroked  with  a  bow 
instead  of  with  the  hand.  This  flute-playing  with  a  bow 
will  only  be  understood  through  its  connection  with  the 
above  examples  of  the  "  stroked  "  stick  ;  ^  we  have  already 
mentioned  that  the  Ashantis  beat  a  sort  of  flute  with  a 
stick. 

The  Bongo  have  a  "  monochord "  which  externally 
resembles  the  gubo  of  the  Zulus,  and  is  common  in  South 
Africa  ;  '^  one  end  is  held  to  the  lips,  while  the  string  is 
struck  by  a  piece  of  bamboo. 

The  M'balunda  negroes  have  a  violin  with  three 
strings  and  a  bow  all  made  of  plant  fibre.*^  The  Mala- 
gasy also  play  a  violin  with  a  bow  which  is  no  less  rudely 
shaped  than  the  violin  itself.  Its  tones  do  not  sound 
"particularly  harmonious,"  but  nevertheless  are  said  to 
be  just  as  pleasant  as  those  of  the  stringed  instruments  of 
China,  Japan,  or  Turkey.'^ 

The  Malays  have  a  sort  of  two-stringed  violin,*^  but  as 

1  Baumann,  Usiimbara,  p.  137.  -  Ratzel,  i.  p.  331, 

^Musters,  /.  c,  p.  77  (illust.,  p.  176). 

^  Mr.  Rowbotham  openly  declares  that  he  cannot  make  anything  out  of  it. 

5  Schweinfurth,  /.  c,  i.  p.  130.  ^  Soyaux,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  177. 

7  Wood,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  772.  *  Waitz-Gerland,  /.  c,  v.  p.  i6g. 


128  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

no  description  of  it  is  given,  and  no  bow  mentioned,  I  am 
unable  to  determine  if  it  has  anything  more  in  common 
with  the  viohn  proper  than  its  name.  In  Banjowangi 
(East  Java)  a  bowed  instrument  is  known.  It  is  a  flat 
two-stringed  violoncello,  the  neck  of  which  is  about  one 
and  a  half  feet  long ;  its  body  consists  of  a  very  thin 
cocoa-nut  of  a  special  nature,  which  is  both  extremely  rare 
and  costly,  and  only  found  on  the  Islands  of  Baly  and 
Madura.  Malay  princes  pay  fabulous  prices  for  it.  Its 
strings  are  horsehair,  and  the  bow  is  made  of  a  crooked 
rotang.  The  instrument  stands  at  right  angles  to  the 
ground  like  our  double  bass,  which  is  also  very  similar 
in  tone.  From  time  to  time  the  musicians  cease  playing 
in  order  to  sing,  which  they  do  in  a  miserable  manner 
almost  continually  in  the  same  tone.^ 

Bastian  mentions  a  monochord — as  he  calls  it — in  the 
Molucca  Islands.  Its  body  was  one  half  of  a  cocoa-nut 
shell,  its  neck  of  bamboo,  its  foot  of  carved  wood  :  so  it  is 
rather  a  sort  of  bass  or  violoncello.  It  is  played  with 
a  bow  made  of  wood  and  a  horsehair  stretched  on  it.'-^ 
Possibly  it  is  related  to  the  East  Javese  instrument  already 
described,  but  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  is  the  original. 
The  Dyaks  have  a  violin  with  two  strings,  and  tones 
like  those  of  an  organ  ;  ^  stringed  instruments  made  from 
cocoa-nut  shells,  iron-wood  hemispheres,  Labu  fruits, 
over  which  one  or  two  rattan  strings  are  stretched,  and 
bows  of  bamboo  and  rattan  strings.*  In  Zubu  (Philippine 
Islands)  the  natives  have  a  "sort  of  violin "  (bow  not 
mentioned)  with  copper  strings.^  The  Apache  Indians 
(south-west  of  North  America)  have  a  violin  with  a 
horsehair  string  and  bow.-'  In  British  Guiana  fibres  are 
stretched  over  a  hollow  branch  under  which  a  bridge  is 


1  Tombe,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  6  and  7.  -  Bastian,  Iiidoii.,  table  i,  Lfg. 

■*  Bock,  /.  c,  p.  77.  ■*  Hein,  /.  c,  p.  115. 

-"'  Pigafetta,  /.  c,  p.  337.  "  Schwatka,  /.  c,  p.  45  (illust.). 


INSTRUMENTS.  I29 

placed:  "thus  the  natives  make  a  rude  vioHn,"  says  Mr. 
Bernau,  without,  however,  mentioning  the  bow.^ 

As  the  origin  of  the  vioHn  the  rebab  (rebeb  or  rebaba) 
is  frequently  mentioned  ;  but  this  belongs  rather  to  semi- 
civilisation  and  is  described  at  one  time  as  a  guitar,  at 
another  as  a  bowed  instrument. 

The  Beduin  rebaba  is  a  sort  of  guitar.^  At  Nejd 
and  among  the  Sinai  Arabs  it  is  considered  indecent  to 
play  it  before  an  audience.  A  "  rebebb  "  with  two 
strings  (bow  not  mentioned)  is  given  as  a  Moorish  instru- 
ment.^ Negroes  alone  sing  here,  for  public  singing  is 
regarded  as  a  slavish  occupation.*  A  rebab  in  Java 
with  two  strings  and  played  with  a  bow  is  said  to  be  of 
Mohammedan  or  Persian  origin.^  The  Sudanese  "erbab" 
consists  of  a  gourd  over  which  a  skin  is  stretched,  like 
that  on  a  drum  ;  over  this  a  string  is  fastened  and  played 
with  a  horsehair  bow.*' 

Never  has  neglect  of  ethnological  research  led  to  such 
hypothetical  results  as  in  the  history  of  the  violin,  a  fact 
which  is  all  the  more  surprising  and  grievous  because  the 
"  Queen  of  the  orchestra  "  has  so  often  given  rise  to  very 
complete  and  obviously  painstaking  historical  investiga- 
tions. 

As  a  curiosity  I  mention  Jean  Rousseau's  (not  Jean 
Jaqucs)  theory,  who  begins  his  history  of  the  violin  with 
the  creation  and  arrives  at  the  conclusion,  "  si  Adam  avoit 
voulu  faire  un  Instrument,  il  auroit  fait  une  Viole,  et  s'il  n'en 
a  pas  fait,  il  est  facile  d'en  donner  les  raisons  ".^  Fetis  was  of 
opinion  that  India  was  the  home  of  our  bow  instruments.^ 

1  Bernau,  /.  c,  p.  45.  -  Burckhardt,  /.  c,  p.  43. 

"  Shaw,  /.  c,  p.  643  ;  Lempriere,  /.  c,  p.  773. 

*  Addison,  /.  c,  p.  439.  ■>  Crawfurd,  /.  c,  pp.  335-339- 
"  Lyon,  /.  c,  p.  161. 

"  Rousseau,  /.  c,  p.  3.  I  quoted  the  original  French  words,  as  Rousseau 
has  often  been  supposed  (for  instance  by  C.  Engel)  to  have  said  that  Adam 
actually  was  the  first  violinist. 

*  Fetis,  Stradivari,  p.  4. 

9 


130  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

He  seems  to  have  overlooked  that  there  was  a  time  when 
India  represented  the  climax  of  human  civilisation,  and 
that  therefore  the  very  primitive  bow  instruments  ought 
to  be  sought  in  the  savage  world  rather.  As  it  is,  we 
have  no  better  proof  of  the  Indian  origin  of  our  violin 
than  for  a  probable  African  one.  Mr.  C.  Engel  begins 
his  history  of  the  violin  with  the  "  rehab '".  This, 
however,  was  not  a  bow  instrument  until  the  time  of 
Mohammedan  culture,  while  its  original  shape  was  a 
guitar,  and  not  the  most  ancient  we  know  of.^  It  seems 
to  me  that  a  simple  bow  played  with  a  stick  approaches 
much  more  the  modern  violin  than  all  the  guitars  played 
with  the  fingers.  Again  Mr.  Hart  says  that  the  peoples 
of  antiquity  seem  to  have  had  no  knowledge  of  bow 
instruments,  and  "it  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  upon 
this  point  writers  on  the  subject  of  the  early  history  of 
the  violin  seem  agreed  ".-  Mr.  Riihlmann  goes  still 
further  and  concludes  that  the  home  of  such  a  magni- 
ficent instrument  as  the  violin  must  be  the  fatherland. 
There  is  to  be  found  the  most  ancient  and  simple  form 
of  the  "  Trummscheidt,"  which  Mr.  Riihlmann  takes  for 
the  original  of  the  violin.  He  thinks,  however,  that  the 
^invention  of  bow  instruments  was  made  by  civilised  peoples 
quite  independently,  at  different  times  and  different  places,^ 
everywhere  starting  afresh  from  the  rudest  form. 

(/)   ORCHESTRA. 

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark  that  several 
instruments  of  the  same  class  are  played  together  among 
primitive  people.  There  were,  for  instance,  flute,  drum, 
and  marimba  orchestras,  while  the  union  of  several  different 
kinds  of  instruments  into  an  ensemble  also  occurred.     I  must 

1  C.  Engel,  Viol.,  p.  24.  The  oldest  European  bow  instrument  is  said 
to  be  the  "  Welsh  crwth  ". 

2  Hart,  /.  c,  p.  2  (edit.  1874). 
^  Riihlmann,  Z.  c,  pp.  6,  23. 


INSTRUMENTS.  I3I 

confess  my  surprise  that  the  quartette  form  is  so  frequently 
found,  for  at  first  I  thought  it  an  accidental  arrangement, 
especially  in  the  case  of  the  drum  quartette;  but  the  arrange- 
ment of  a  marimba  quartette  and  the  union  of  a  marimba 
with  other  instruments,  intentionally  chosen  according  to 
their  pitch,  must  have  innate  musical  grounds.  On  the 
other  hand  savages  trouble  themselves  little  about  a  melody, 
which — when  they  have  it — is  seldom  really  definite. 
Could,  under  these  circumstances,  a  harmonious  ac- 
companiment and  ensemble  be  possible  ?  Probably  in 
such  cases  the  melody  moves  within  a  restricted  radius 
and  is  kept  within  a  fairly  definite  traditional  modulation. 
I  believe  that  active  tradition,  direct  imitation,  little  origi- 
nality, and  a  lack  of  sudden  and  unexpected  innovations 
in  the  leading  of  a  melody  take  the  place  here  of  a  syste- 
matic study.  Even  the  productions  of  European  gipsy 
bands,  whose  performances  by  ear  often  greatly  astonish 
us,^  are  more  or  less  stereotyped  ;  everything  really  artistic 
is  previously  studied. 

A  distinguished  Molua  in  Mussumba  always  has  at  his 
court  an  orchestra,  which  consists  of  two  marimbas  and  a 
gingwoa.-  In  Moody  Schweinfurth  met  with  four  young 
men  of  the  Bongo  tribe  who  came  together  every  evening 
for  quartette  playing :  there  were  two  drummers  and  two 
tube  players.^  Why  in  this  and  in  numerous  other  cases 
the  number  four  should  be  chosen  could  only  be  ascertained 
if  the  travellers  had  reported  correctly  what  and  how  the 
natives  played,  but  unfortunately  nothing  is  said  on  this 
subject. 

Larger  orchestras,  generally  a  sort  of  military  band, 
are  found  at  the  courts  of  many  African  chiefs.  Mr. 
Avezac  states  that  a  music  corps  is  considered  almost  an 
attribute  of  a  chief.^     Rumanika,  the  Karagwe  chief,  had 

1  Liebich,  /.  c,  p.  58  (with  bibliography  on  the  gipsies). 

-  Pogge,  /.  c,  p.  241.  -^  Schweinfurth,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  249  (illust.). 

■*  Avezac,  /.  c,  p.  gi. 


132  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

a  band  of  sixteen  men — fourteen  tubes  and  two  drums — 
which  were  arranged  in  three  set,  the  drums  placed  at  the 
back  ;  thev  played  when  marching  and  swayed  their  bodies 
in  time  with  the  music,  the  conductor  touching  the  ground 
with  his  knee  at  each  beat.^  The  pieces  were  played  in 
waltz  and  march  time.  Grant  declares  that  their  playing 
was  much  better  than  he  had  ever  expected  to  witness, 
but  at  the  same  time  he  states  the  remarkable  fact  that 
at  Karagwe  hardly  a  single  dance  was  known.-  I  must 
mention  that  Grant  visited  districts  where  no  European 
had  previously  been. 

Mr.  Speke  was  received  by  the  Waganda  with  a  band 
of  twelve  flutes  and  five  drums.=^  Sepopo,  King  of  the 
Marotse  Kingdom  (Upper  Zambesi),  had  a  band  of  twenty 
men,  of  w-hich,  as  a  rule,  only  eight  played  at  one  time, 
while  the  others  were  kept  in  reserve.'*  Several  drummers 
played  with  the  palms  of  their  hands,  or  with  their  fingers, 
on  long  conical  or  cylindrical  kettle-drums  or  double 
drums  in  the  shape  of  an  hour-glass,  which  were  sus- 
pended from  their  necks  b}'  a  strap.  The  principal 
instrument  was  the  marimba  ;  besides  there  were  the  zither- 
like sylimba,  iron  bells,  rattles,  and  various  pipes.  All 
these  instruments  are  to  be  found  ever}'where  among  the 
population,  but  the  more  elaborate  ones  belong  exclusively 
to  the  royal  band.  The  common  method  of  playing  them 
is  purely  mechanical  and  the  melodies  are  somewhat 
monotonous.  Mr.  Holub  says  that  a  little  cultivation 
of  music  among  the  Marotse-Mabundas  would  soon  be 
crowned  with  success.  In  Lunda,  too,  there  are  regularly 
organised  bands  which  play  fairly  well  but  always  the 
same  melody.^     Further  mention  is  made  of  the  Dembo 

1  Wood,   /.  c,   i.  p.   448   (illus.);   another  illus.  by  Clement,  /.  c,  pp^ 

152-155- 

-  Grant,  /.  c,  pp.  184-1S5  ;  Lake  Vict.,  p.  192. 

^  Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  463. 

^  Holub,  /.  c,  p.  168  ;   Zambesi  orchestra,  illus.  by  Clement,  p.  153. 

'  Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  561. 


INSTRUMENTS.  133 

bands,  which  consist  of  five  reed-pipes,  two  gourds  which 
are  filled  with  stones  and  shaken  like  rattles  by  little  bo3's 
in  time  to  the  fife  music. ^  The  chief  Kasongo  had  a  band 
of  wooden  drums,  marimbas,  and  globular  gourds  which 
were  played  like  wind  instruments  by  men  and  women, 
and  emitted  a  sound  similar  to  that  of  a  bugle."'  At 
human  sacrifices  in  Dahomey  chorus  and  orchestra  were 
united.  The  old  To-no-num  and  his  fifty  men  went  round 
the  half-circle  singing  and  dancing  and  clapping  hands. 
Then  came  the  Pani-gan-ho-to  or  gong-gong  men,  four  in 
number,  and  carrying  single  and  double  cymbals,  whilst 
a  correspondingly  numerous  chorus  of  women  and  twenty 
more  male  singers  promenaded  up  and  down  preceded  by 
a  drummer  playing  upon  the  Ganikbaja,  a  drum  borrowed 
in  idea  from  the  Ashantis.-^ 

At  Time  among  the  Mandingoes  there  was  a  band  of 
four  large  drums,  four  cymbals,  six  oboes,  small  children 
rattling  baskets  in  time,  and  the  whole  was  led  by  two 
conductors.     The  musicians  were  Bambaras."' 

How  much  musical  talent  some  African  races  possess 
is  shown  by  the  band  of  the  Ashantis  at  Cape  Coast 
Castle,  which  plays  English  melodies  by  ear  in  "  a  most 
astonishing  fashion  ".^  In  Cape  Colony,  too,  many 
families  make  use  of  the  natural  inclination  of  the  slaves, 
especially  of  the  Malays,  for  music,  to  develop  it  by  teach- 
ing, and  so  to  arrange  small  orchestras.  They  play  then 
upon  European  clarionets,  horns  and  bassoons,  violins, 
basses  and  flutes,  and  always  by  ear.*^  In  Brazil,  negroes 
are  amazingly  quickly  trained  for  the  music  corps. '^ 

The  influence  of  culture  is  also  distinctly  traceable  in 
the  band  of  the  Fulbe,  which  consists  of  eight  musicians 
on  horseback  who  played  the  drum  ganga,  a  wind  instru- 

1  Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  561.  -  Cameron,  /.  c,  p.  355  (illus.). 

•'  Burton,  Mission  to  Gchlc,  i.  p.  377.  -•  Caillie,  I.  c,  ii.  p.  34. 

s  Beecham,  /.  c,  p.  169.  ^  Lichtenstein,  /.  c,  i.  p.  45. 
"  Kerst,  /.  c,  pp.  303-304. 


134  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

ment  pampamine,  a  flute  elgaita,  a  sort  of  double  tympa- 
num, kalango,  another  koso,  an  Egyptian  double  dara- 
buka  or  jojo,  and  a  small  horn,  kafo.  The  wind 
instruments  together  are  called  by  the  Haussa  "  bushe- 
bushe,"  which  the  Fellam  (as  the  Fulbe  are  called  by  the 
Haussa)  have  turned  into  "  fufe-fufedji  ".  These  well- 
equipped  musicians  can  make  any  amount  of  noise  on 
their  instruments,  but  it  is  neither  harmonious  nor  peculiar 
to  them.  Mr.  Barth  thinks  they  learnt  this  from  the 
Arabs,  and  he  vastly  preferred  the  music  of  a  single  native 
Maimolo.^ 

A  ver}-  primitive  ensemble  is  common  on  the  Society 
Islands.  For  the  purpose  they — strangely  enough — tune 
such  instruments  as  the  drum,  Jew's  harp,  and  a  flageolet 
(hoe)  together.  The  musicians  then  seat  themselves  in  a 
circle,  bend  their  bodies  over  their  knees  and  play  wonder- 
fully well  in  time,  "  although  the  same  praise  cannot  be 
awarded  to  their  melodies  "."  On  Solomon  Islands  there 
was  a  band  of  twenty  men  with  pan-pipes  (twenty-three 
tubes),  long  bamboo  flutes  with  two  to  three  openings. 
It  is  said  they  play  in  thirds  and  fifths.^  From  this 
example  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  draw  a  safe  conclusion  as 
to  the  use  of  consecutive  fifths,  for  even  European  village 
musicians  play  sometimes  in  fifths  without  (unfortunately) 
knowing  or  caring  about  it. 

European  influence  is  already  noticeable  in  the  Malay 
orchestras  in  Sumatra.  They  have  drums,  flutes,  and 
European  fiddles,^  St.  John  describes  a  Malay  band 
which  played  waltzes,  but  nothing  else,  by  ear.''  Javese 
orchestras  are  renowned,  although  they  are  to-day  under 
European  influence,  yet  from  time  immemorial  the  natives 
have  been  accustomed  to  play  in  an  orchestra.  The 
instruments   are   so   expensive   that   a  collection  of  some 

'  Barth,  Afrika,  ii.  p.  53.  -  Wood,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  405. 

3  Ratzel,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  228.  *  Bock,  /.  c,  p.  281. 

•'  St.  John,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  184. 


INSTRUMENTS.  I35 

twenty  of  them  costs  600  to  1000  dollars.^  The  tone  of 
such  an  orchestra  coming  from  a  distance  has  been  Hkened 
to  that  of  a  glass  harmonica.''  The  melodies,  although 
simple  and  monotonous,  are  never  wearying  if  played  by 
the  "  gambany  Kayn  "  ;  this  is  a  peculiar  arrangement  of 
instruments  in  an  orchestra.  Another  is  called  "  Gamelan  " ; 
its  concerts  sometimes  last  for  several  days  and  nights 
together  without  intermission.  At  Lamajang  there  was 
an  orchestra  which  consisted  of  one  two-stringed  fiddle 
and  several  instruments  of  percussion  made  of  wood  and 
brass ;  the  former  were  mere  wooden  pans  hung  by 
strings  to  a  wooden  box.  The  melodies  with  their  irregular 
rhythms  reminded  Jukes  a  little  of  Scottish  songs.^ 

Mr.  Davy  tells  us  of  a  king  in  Ceylon  who  frequently 
had  his  band  playing  for  his  delectation  ;  the  musicians 
had  to  sing  at  the  same  time.^ 

I  have  been  able  to  find  but  one  example  of  an  orchestra 
among  Indians,  and  that  in  a  description  of  an  Indian 
festival  in  Patagonia.  The  band  consisted  of  drums,  fifes, 
and  bows  only.  The  drum  was  a  shell  or  bowl  over  which 
a  skin  was  stretched  ;  the  fife  was  a  thigh  bone  of  a  guanaco 
pierced  with  several  holes,  and  either  placed  to  the  mouth 
and  played,  or  "stroked"  with  a  short  bow  with  horse- 
hair.'' 

That  the  primitive  orchestra  recognised  a  conductor 
has  alread}'  been  stated  ;  indeed  the  baton  is  known  as  well, 
but  is  always  used  with  an  audible  stroke,  which  custom, 
I  am  sorry  to  say,  occurs  also  in  Europe  sometimes.  For 
conducting  the  Indians  use  a  notched  stick  drawn  over  a 
resisting  medium.'''  The  king  of  the  Monbuttu  himself  beats 
time  with  all  the  dignity  of  a  musical  director ;  his  baton  is 


Bickmore,  /.  c,  p.  191  (illus.)- 

Raffles,  /.  c,  i.  p.  471  ;  Javcsc  Instrnin.,  by  Veth,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  470-480. 

Jukes,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  48.  •*  Davy,  /.  c,  p.  156. 

Musters,  /.  c,  p.  81.  '•  Schoolcraft,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  514. 


136  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

a  kind  of  child's  rattle.^  On  the  Andaman  Islands  a  board 
is  used  upon  which  time  is  struck  with  the  feet.  This 
board  is  made  from  the  trunk  of  a  Ptcrocarpus  dalbcrgioides, 
is  shield-shaped,  and  often  five  feet  long  and  two  feet 
broad.  The  convex  side  is  turned  outwards,  and  the  pointed 
end  fixed  in  the  ground,  a  stone  laid  under  it  and  the 
whole  board  is  struck  with  the  heel  only.^  In  Australia 
dances  are  led  by  a  man  who,  following  the  time  of 
the  music,  directs  the  movements  with  a  crescent-shaped 
instrument.^  At  any  rate  Mr.  Daniel  errs  in  saying  that 
the  first  conductor  was  the  successor  of  an  oyster-shell 
(thus  pointing  to  its  use  for  marking  the  time)  and  that 
the  composer  Lully  (1633-1687)  was  the  first  bandmaster.* 

(</)    INSTRUMENTS  OF  THE  MOST  ANCIENT  PERIODS  OF 
CULTURE. 

xA.lthough  it  is  no  part  of  my  task  to  attempt  to  follow 
up  the  development  of  musical  instruments  from  the 
earliest  to  the  present  times,  yet  I  may  be  allowed  to  say 
a  word  or  two  about  those  periods  at  which  the  construc- 
tion of  instruments  experienced  special  development, 
either  in  connection  with  the  progress  of  a  nati®n's  own 
culture  or  through   European  influence. 

The  majority  of  instruments  in  Sumatra  has  been 
copied  from  the  Chinese  and  other  civilised  nations  of 
the  East,^  while  in  Ce3'lon  Portuguese  influence  is 
obvious.*^  Unfortunately  Mr.  Davy  does  not  mention  to 
which  specimens  of  instruments  (which  he  illustrates) 
this  remark  appeals.  He  speaks  of  drums,  tomtoms, 
trumpets,  and  bows.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say  anything 
further  here  about  Chinese  and  Japanese  instruments, 
the  artistic  manufacture  of  which  has  long  been  known 
and  appreciated ;  the  influence  of  their  art  makes  itself 

'  Elson,  /.  c\,  p.  269.  -  Man,  /.  c,  p.  399. 

^  Eyre,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  235.  ••  Daniel,  Transf.  dcs  Iiistr.,  pp.  266-267. 

^  Marsden,  /.  c,  p.  195.  «  Davy,  /.  c,  p.  156  (illus.,  p.  240). 


INSTRUMENTS.  I37 

felt  in  Burmah.  Especial  mention  has  been  made  of  a 
harp  "  soum,"  of  a  violin  "  turr,"  with  three  strings,  of 
a  bow  (said  to  be  a  perfectly  original  invention  of  the 
Burmese),  of  a  flageolet  "  pullaway,"  of  a  collection  of 
cymbals  "  kyezoup,"  of  a  guitar  "  patola,"  of  a  drum 
"  boundaw,"  and  of  a  pan-pipe  "  heem  ".^  A  speciality  of 
the  East  is  the  drums  arranged  in  a  circle  in  the  midst  of 
which  the  player  sits  so  that  he  can  easily  produce  a  variety 
of  tones  from  them.  Very  similar  are  the  Siamese  instru- 
ments, which  are  frequently  arranged  in  two  stereotyped 
kinds  of  orchestras — Pepat  (consisting  of  six  instruments) 
and  Mahari  (of  eight) ;  these  titles  are  translated  by  Bowring 
into  "  common  band  "  and  "  singing  band  ".-  The  peculiar 
mixture  in  the  East  of  primitiveness  and  culture,  originality 
and  progress  is  also  found  in  the  instruments  common  in 
Tonkin  :  drums,  bassoons  made  of  copper,  oboes,  guitars, 
and  violins.^ 

A  vast  number  of  really  beautiful  musical  instruments 
once  existed  during  the  time  of  ancient  civilisation  in 
Mexico.  Ruined  by  Spanish  invasion,  and  to-day  much 
under-estimated,  we  find  here  the  remains  of  so  high  a 
state  of  culture  that  a  short  notice  of  it  even  in  this  place 
seems  not  out  of  place.  Music  seems  to  have  been  as  it 
were  a  step-child.  But  what  was  it  in  the  days  of  the 
Greeks  and  Romans  ?  Regarded  from  the  present-day 
point  of  view,  did  the  musical  art  work  of  the  Greeks 
stand  as  high  as  the  poetic  or  plastic  ?  By  no  means  ;  so 
in  Mexico  the  inferior  condition  of  music,  which  in  the 
case  of  Rome  and  Athens  appears  to  us  quite  natural, 
should  not  be  thought  too  little  of.  The  most  frequently 
mentioned  instruments  are  two  kettle-drums :  hue-huetl 
(huehuilt,     vevtl,    tlapanhuehuetl),    and    teponaztli :     the 

1  Symes,  /.  c,  p.  50S  ;  Yule,  /.  c,  p.  13  st-q. ;  illus.  by  Malcom,  /.  c,  i. 
p.  204  stq. 

-  Bowring,  /.  c,  i.  p.  147. 

•*  Baron,  /.  c,  p.  672  ;   Richard,  /.  c,  p.  726. 


138  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

former  was  capable  of  being  tuned  and  accompanied  the 
song  ;  the  latter  was  a  sort  of  double  kettle-drum  with  two 
different  tones. ^  In  Malinalco,  near  Toluca,  there  was  a 
kettle-drum  called  the  tlamalhuilili ;  ^  the  Aztecs  had  a 
host  of  most  characteristic  wind  and  percussion  instru- 
ments, the  former  being  shaped  like  animals  ^  (birds, 
snakes,  or  the  like).  In  Yucatan  there  were  nose-flutes, 
bamboo  tubes,  mussel  trumpets,'^  and  also  a  kettle-drum, 
tunkul.^  Among  the  antiquities  of  Chiriqui  (Panama) 
there  are  wind  instruments  made  on  the  same  principle  as 
the  above-mentioned  Aztec  instruments,  in  the  shape  of  an 
animal,  with  two  openings  (two  to  six  notes  of  the  octave), 
the  mouthpiece  being  in  the  tail,  or  in  the  elbow  if  shaped 
like  a  human  figure.  Sometimes  a  ball  was  placed  inside, 
the  tone  varying  with  the  position  of  this  ball.^  Scherzer 
found  in  Central  America  a  primitive  fife  "  el  pito,"  a  drum 
"  el  atambor,"  an  instrument  "el  tan,"  consisting  of  a  piece 
of  wood,  eighteen  inches  in  length,  and  struck  with  a  stick, 
another,  "  la  tortuga,"  made  of  a  tortoise-shell  and  also 
struck  with  a  stick.  With  these  instruments  the  monoto- 
nous music  of  a  pantomime  was  played.' 

During  the  reign  of  Tutul  Xuis  at  Uxmal  (Maya 
nation)  a  dwarf  found  two  musical  instruments,  the 
silver  Tunkul  and  the  Zoot.  An  old  prophecy  said  that 
when  the  music  of  that  instrument  was  heard  in  the  land 
the  monarch  must  abdicate  in  favour  of  the  being  who 
played  it.  And  so  it  happened,  for  in  the  fight  between 
king  and  dwarf  the  latter  came  off  victorious.^ 

^  Clavigero,  /.  c,  \ol.  i.  book  \'ii.  §  44,  p.  398  (illus.);  Torquemada, 
/.  f.,  lib.  xiv.  cap.  xi.  ;  Th.  Backer,  /.  c,  pp.  51,  52;  Nebel,  /.  c,  plate  6 
(counting  from  behind). 

-  Bancroft,  /.  c,  iv.  p.  504;  Mexico,  Aiialcs  del  Miu.  dc  Fonicnto,  1854, 
i.  p.  241. 

"*  Bancroft,  /.  c,  iv.  pp.  519,  561  (illus.)  ;  Prescott,  Hist.  Conqu.  Mexico, 
iii.  pp.  103-10S. 

■*  Landa,  /.  c.,  pp.  125-126,  §  xxii.  ^  Baker,  /.  c.,  p.  54. 

''  Bancroft,  iv.  p.  19.  "•  Scherzer,  /.  c.,  p.  153. 

'^  Bancroft,  /.  c.,  v.  p.  632. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE    BASIS   OF   OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM. 
I.  HARMONY. 

When  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  Kolbe  travelled 
among  the  Hottentots  he  found  them  playing  different 
gom-goms  in  harmony.  They  also  sang  the  notes  of  the 
common  chord  down  to  the  lower  octave,  each  one  begin- 
ning with  the  phrase  whenever  the  former  had  already 
come  to  the  second  or  third  tone,  thus  producing  a  har- 
monious effect.^  The  words  to  this  song  were  simply 
"  ho,  ho,  ho".  Burchell,  who  repeatedly  assures  us  that 
he  probably  was  the  first  European  who  ever  touched  the 
African  soil  in  that  part  where  he  travelled,  describes  the 
harmonious  singing  of  the  Bachapin  boys  [Mus.  Ex, 
14] :  sometimes  one  of  them  led  the  band  and  the  rest 
joined  in  at  different  intervals,  and,  guided  only  by  the 
ear,  attuned  their  notes  in  correct  harmony.  The  elder 
boys,  whose  voices  were  of  a  lower  pitch,  sang  the  bass, 
while  the  younger  produced,  in  their  turn,  the  higher  tones 
of  the  treble.^  The  Bechuana  also  sing  in  harmony.  The 
melody  of  their  songs  is  simple  enough,  consisting  chiefly 
of  descending  and  ascending  by  thirds,  while  the  singers 
have  a  sufficient  appreciation  of  harmony  to  sing  in  two 
parts.^  Moodie  tells  us  that  he  very  often  heard  the 
Hottentot  servant  girls  singing  in  two  parts ;  they  even 
sang  European  tunes  which  were  quite  new  to  them  with 

1  Kolbe,  /.  c\,  p.  528.  -  Burchell,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  438. 

■^  Ibid. 
(139) 


140  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

the  accompaniment  of  a  second  of  their  own.^  The  same 
is  said  by  Soyaux  of  the  negro  girls  in  Sierra  Leone.- 
We  need  not  trace  European  influence  in  these  instances, 
for  the  girls  had  neither  been  taught  to  sing  the  second 
voice  nor  had  they  heard  it,  but  made  it  of  their  own 
accord.  Many  peoples  {e.g.,  the  Oriental  nations)  have 
every  opportunity  of  hearing  European  harmonic  music 
but  none  of  them  understand  it,  and  much  less  would  they 
be  able  to  invent  a  second  voice  to  a  new  tune.  This 
shows  that  the  capacity  of  singing  in  different  parts 
requires  a  peculiar  gift,  a  natural  talent  and  original 
feeling  for  harmony,  which  cannot  be  acquired  by  mere 
hearing  harmonic  music.  Another  still  more  striking 
example  of  Hottentots'  musical  talent  was  related  to 
Moodie  by  a  German  officer.  When  the  latter  happened 
to  play  that  beautifully  pathetic  air  of  Gluck's,  "  Che  faro 
senza  Euridice,"  on  his  violin,  "  he  was  surprised  to  observe 
that  he  was  listened  to  by  some  Hottentot  women  vvitli 
the  deepest  attention,  and  that  some  of  them  were  even 
affected  to  tears.  In  a  day  or  two  afterwards  he  heard 
his  favourite  melody  with  accompaniments  all  over  the 
country,  wherever  his  wandering  led  him."  ^  At  first 
it  seems  astonishing  that  there  should  be  Hottentots 
apparently  endowed  with  so  great  a  musical  gift ;  it  is 
especially  surprising  to  hear  of  their  repeating  the  air 
with  accompaniments,  since  the  German  officer  was 
certainly  not  able  to  play  both  on  his  violin  at  the  same 
time.  This  statement,  however,  will  no  longer  appear  to 
us  incredible  if  compared  with  similar  examples  in  the 
accounts  of  some  other  travellers.  Theophilus  Hahn,  who 
lived  in  Africa  for  fifteen  years,  tells  us  that  his  father, 
the  missionary,  used  to  play  some  hymns  before  the  tribe 
of  the  Nama  Hottentots  to  the  accompaniment  of  a  con- 


Moodie,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  227.  -  Soyaux,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  174. 

•^  Moodie,  i.  p.  228. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I4I 

certina.  Some  days  after  they  would  repeat  the  hymns- 
K'ith  the  Dutch  words  which  they  could  not  understand. 
Hahn  says  "they  drawl  the  grave  sounds  of  the  hymns 
such  as  '  O  Haupt  voll  Blut  und  Wunden,'  '  Ein 
Lammlein  geht  und  tragt  die  Schuld,'  with  the  same 
ardour  as  '  O  du  mein  lieber  Augustin,'  '  My  heart  is  in 
the  Highlands,'  or  '  Long,  long  ago  '  ".^  These  tribes  have 
not  only  an  admirable  talent  for  music  but  for  general 
imitation  as  well.  They  imitate  so  faithfully  the  approach 
of  the  lion,  the  fright  of  the  different  animals,  and  capture 
of  its  prey,  that  they  can  make  themselves  intelligible 
even  to  a  person  who  does  not  understand  their  words. 
Although  this  dramatic  talent  is  peculiar  to  Hottentots 
and  Bushmen,  other  savage  tribes  display  an  equally 
great  talent  for  music  and  admirable  feeling  for  har- 
mony. The  Ashantis  play  their  instruments  in  twa 
parts,-  [Mus.  Ex.  i8],  the  Asaba  people  (Niger)  frequently 
sing  in  sequences  of  thirds,^  the  Maoris  sang  in  thirds 
when  Cook  visited  New  Zealand  for  the  first  time.'^  [Mus. 
Ex.  15.]  On  Samoa  the  natives  had  some  songs  for  two 
voices  long  before  any  European  influence  could  have 
existed. ■'  Mr.  Zimmermann  heard  on  the  Solomon  Islands 
the  women  singing  in  a  chorus  with  a  sort  of  harmony  ; 
the  melody  was  very  simple,  partly  resting  on  one  tone, 
partly  rising  and  falling  in  a  chord,  out  of  which  the 
third  and  fifth  could  easily  be  distinguished.*"  Again,  Mr. 
Williams  tells  us  that  he  heard  on  the  Fiji  Islands  a  song 
where  the  bass  alternated  with  the  air ;  then  the  singers 
sounded  one  of  the  common  chords  in  the  bass  clef  with- 
out the  alternation.^  On  Java  numerous  orchestras  play 
elaborate  music  in  different  parts ;  the  harmony  is  said  to 
be  rather  barbarian  ;  the  scores,  however,  which  Mr.  Land 

^  Globus,  vol.  xviii.  p.  120.  -  Bowdich,  /.  c,  p.  138. 

^  Day,  Niger,  p.  272.  ^  Forster,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  477-478. 

^Wilkes,  /.  c,  pp.  135  and  145.  ''Zimmermann,  /.  c,  i.  p.  234. 
"  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  142. 


142  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

lately  published  ^  undoubtedly  show  the  germ  of  counter- 
point in  so  many  cases  that  these  examples  are  interest- 
ing at  least  from  this  point  of  view.  [Mus.  Ex.  25.1 
Whether  harmony  was  known  in  ancient  India  is,  to  say 
the  least,  doubtful.  In  Sanskrit  harmony  is  termed  sruti, 
and  melody  raga,-  but  it  is  not  certain  whether  sruti 
means  harmony  in  our  sense.  At  present  the  Hindu 
harmony  is  merely  a  continuation  of  the  tonic  or  domi- 
nant similar  to  the  Scotch  bagpipe  music. '^  A  similar 
"  harmony  "  occurs  in  examples  of  music  in  Tongatabu 
and  among  the  Bushmen.  Mus.  Ex.  20,  21.]  On  the 
Andaman  Islands  men  sing  in  unison  ;  some  women  sing 
with  the  children  in  falsetto,  an  octave  above  :  the 
remainder  of  the  women  sing  in  what  seems  to  be  in- 
tended for  a  perfect  fifth,  but  what  is  occasionally  a  minor 
sixth  above  the  men.  Difference  of  pitch  in  the  voices 
introduces  other  notes  which — according  to  Portman — 
can  only  be  called  "out  of  tune".  Be  that  as  it  may, 
they  sing  at  times  in  intervals  which  are  intended  to  be 
harmonious."*  In  the  Siamese  the  perception  of  concords 
in  notes  is  as  acute  as  that  of  a  European  musician  :  they 
are  just  as  long  in  tuning  an  instrument  as  we,  but  they 
do  not  seem  practically  to  introduce  such  concords  into 
their  music.^  The  North  American  Indians  sing  in  unison 
as  a  rule,  harmony  being  seldom  employed,  and  when  it 
is,  it  is  always  altered  every  time  the  song  is  performed.*' 
The  Keres  in  New  Mexico  sing  in  three  voices.''  From 
the  west  coast  of  America  La  Perouse  quotes  a  song  in 
two  voices.^      fMus.  Ex.  ig." 

Thus  neither  harmony  nor  the  germs  of  counterpoint 

1  Land,  /.  c.  -  E.  Balfour,  Cycl.  of  India,  ii.  p.  1019. 

■*  Saurindramohana  Thakura,  Hind.  Mus.,  p.  54  ;   Day,  Mns.  Hind.,  pp. 
11-12. 

*  Portman,  /.  c,  p.  184.  '  Bowring,  /.  c,  i.  p.  150. 

6  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  18.  "  Davis,  El  Gringo,  p.  119. 

8  La  Perouse,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  150. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I43 

are  entirely  unknown  to  primitive  nations,  and  it  would 
seem  from  all  the  examples  I  was  able  to  collect  that 
the  principle  of  tonality  is  in  most  cases  unmistakable. 
Baker  in  his  monograph  on  Indian  music  expressly  calls 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  songs  of  the  Iroquois  start 
from  a  fundamental  tone  to  which  the  melody  finally 
returns.^  The  same  has  been  remarked  by  Stumpf  in  his 
essay  on  the  songs  of  the  Bellacula  Indians.^  They  them- 
selves said  they  knew  these  songs  before  they  ever  saw 
the  white  man.^ 

The  numerous  examples  of  a  primitive  orchestra, 
indeed  the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  quartette  form 
systematically  arranged  according  to  four  separate  voices, 
also  points  to  the  existence  of  harmony  and  tonality, 
and  their  appreciation  by  savage  races.  A  quartette  of 
marimbas  seems  to  be  especially  favoured  by  the  Angola.'^ 
Livingstone  found  a  marimba  quartette  and  four  drums 
playing  together,^  in  other  cases  two  marimbas,  two 
cassutos,  and  one  guilando  (bass)  were  played  in  ensemble.'^ 
In  Guatemala  several  marimbas  accompany  the  songs  in 
correct  harmony.^  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  African 
and  Malayan  players  understand  European  music  so  well 
as  to  be  able  to  accompany  by  ear  with  their  whole 
orchestra  a  simple  European  tune,  and  to  play  our  dance 
music  from  memory  without  having  ever  seen  the  notes. 

People  who  know  how  to  accompany  a  song  and  how 
to  play  in  ensemble  cannot  be  without  a  certain  feeling  for 
harmony  and  tonality. 

With  these  ethnological  facts  to  hand  w^e  may  oppose 
the  widespread  theory  of  harmony  and  counterpoint  being 
musical  inventions  of  modern  times.     Some  thirty  years 

1  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  19.  -  Stumpf,  BcUac.  Iiid.,  p.  416. 

•*  Helmholtz   said  (/.  c,   p.   342)  :    "  The   ancient  \¥orld  developed   this 
principle  of  tonality  in  homophonic  music,  the  modern  in  harmonic"  (?). 
-•  Merolla,  /.  c,  p.  244.  ^  Li,^,irigstone,  /.  c,  p.  293. 

«  Carli,  /.  c,  i.  p.  695.  ~  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  705. 


144  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

ago  Westphal  took  great  pains  to  prove  that  the  ancient 
Greeivs  at  least  knew  harmony  and  made  use  of  it  in  their 
instrumental  music.^  He  would  probably  have  been  much 
more  credited  if  it  had  been  known  that  this  supposed 
modern  invention  was  in  use  among  savage  tribes  in 
ancient  times.  Rousseau  called  harmony  "  une  invention 
Gothique  et  barbare.  Les  Europeens  sont  les  seuls  qui 
aient  une  Harmonic  des  Accords.  Harmonic  etoit  reserve 
a  des  peuples  du  Nord."  A  somewhat  similar  opinion 
has  since  been  expressed  by  several  authors.- 

Now  we  have  seen  that  even  uncivilised  races  know 
how  to  accompany  a  simple  song  by  ear,  while  some  of 
the  more  civilised  ones,  as  the  Chinese  and  other  Oriental 
people,  do  not  understand  our  harmony,  although  they 
have  every  opportunity  of  hearing  our  music.  Thus  the 
diiTerence  between  people  with  and  without  harmonic 
music  is  not  a  historical  but  a  racial  one.  There  is  of 
course  no  doubt  that  our  feeling  for  and  comprehension 
of  harmon\'  have  been  developed  b}'  time,  but  so  also  has 
our  feeling  for  melody.  If  we  compare  a  modern  song 
with  an  air  of  savage  races,  we  find  the  latter  very  short, 
restricted  to  two  to  three  tones  and  the  same  phrase 
constantly  repeated,  while  our  musical  themes  are  worked 
out,  built  up,  prolonged  and  varied  so  as  to  form  a 
coherent,  elaborate  melody.  So  it  is  not  harmony  alone 
which  has  been  developed  in  course  of  time.  Therefore 
I  do  not  think  that  our  ideas  of  the  structure  and  forma- 
tion of  melody  are  completed  before  our  ideas  of  harmony 
begin,  but  that  both  originate  at  the  same  time,  and  going 
hand  in  hand  in  their  respective  development  mutually 
influence  each  other.  It  is  impossible  to  work  out  a 
melody  without  harmonic  changes,  and  the  development 
of  a  melod}'  is  entirely  dependent  upon  the  harmony.  It 
is  true  there  were  periods  in  the  history  of  music  when 

^Westphal,  /.  c,  p.  24.  -  Willard,  /.  c,  p.  40. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I45 

melody  seems  to  have  gone  its  own  way  and  when  the 
whole  music  seemed  to  develop  in  a  melodious  direction 
only,  but  this  is  the  case  with  harmony  and  counterpoint 
as  well.  Is  it  not  significant  that  nations  without  any 
feeling  for  harmony  would  not  have  developed  their  music, 
nor  even  their  melody  to  the  same  degree  as  we  have 
done,  and  that  their  airs  would  have  remained  melan- 
cholic and  monotonous  unless  they  had  been  taken  up  by 
European  composers,  who  harmonised  them  and  worked 
them  out  to  accomplished  works  of  art  ?  On  the  other 
hand,  the  most  primitive  germ  of  harmony  and  counter- 
point is  the  continuation  of  the  key-note  throughout  the 
piece  ;  the  same  method,  but  intended  only  instead  of 
actually  sung,  gives  the  principle  of  tonality  :  the  essence 
of  melody.  This  shows  their  common  origin.  Thus, 
after  all,  Rameau  was  not  so  wrong  when  he  said  :  "  La 
melodic  n'est  qu'une  suite  de  I'Harmonie,"^  and  "il  poroit 
que  la  melodic  provient  de  I'Harmonie  "."'  Primitive 
harmony  is  no  doubt  very  rude,  but  primitive  melody  is 
precisely  of  the  same  kind. 

It  may  still  be  objected  that  those  savages  who  know 
harmony  now  may  have  acquired  it  in  the  course  of  time 
(even  without  foreign  influence),  and  may  have  been 
ignorant  of  it  centuries  ago.  I  think,  however,  I  can 
take  it  for  granted  that  there  are  still  savage  tribes,  whose 
culture  has  remained  stationary  ever  since  the  stone  age. 
If  this  is  so,  it  seems  —  to  say  the  least  —  extremely 
improbable  that  such  tribes  (as  Bushmen,  Australians) 
should  at  the  same  time  have  made  any  progress  in  music 
alone. 

2.    MAJOR   AND    MINOR    KEY. 

It  is  surprising  how  often  savages  sing  in  the  minor 
key.     The  music  of  Australian  tribes  is  to  a  great  extent 

^  Rameau,  /.  c,  p.  23.  -Ibid.,  p.  138. 


146  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

minor,  and  so  was  the  music  of  the  Tasmanians.^  The 
songs  of  the  former  are  marked  throughout  by  sudden, 
frequent,  and  ever-varying  inflections  of  voice,  in  compass 
rarely  exceeding  the  distance  of  a  third,  and  minor  inter- 
vals predominating.  In  Tonga  the  songs  begin  in  a  slow 
and  solemn  style  ;  gradually  other  voices  and  instruments 
join  in,  and  then  the  performers  begin  to  quicken  their 
time  both  in  music  and  dancing  to  the  loudest  pitch  and 
quickest  possible  movement.  The  whole  mostly  in  the 
minor  key."  Music  in  Nukahivva  (Washington  Islands) 
dwells  principally  upon  quarter  tones,  not  going  beyond 
the  minor  third  from  E  to  G,  except  that  it  sometimes  sinks 
into  D.  The  rising  from  E  to  G  and  sinking  vice  versa  takes 
place  by  successive  quarter  tones,  the  minor  third  ^  being 
always  preferred.     [Mus.  Ex.  24.] 

The  negroes  in  Sierra  Leone  always  sing  in  minor.'* 
The  Bongo  negroes  also  sing  sometimes  in  the  minor 
key.^  The  inhabitants  of  the  lake  district  of  East  Africa 
appear  to  affect  the  major  rather  than  the  interminable 
minor  key  of  the  Asiatics.^  Again,  in  Fiji  singing  is 
invariably  in  the  major  key.^  The  examples  of  African 
music  show  a  preference  for  the  major  key  to  the  minor, 
and  therefore  we  cannot  say  that  as  a  rule  the  minor  key 
occurs  more  frequently  among  uncivilised  people  as  a 
whole  ;  ^  it  depends  upon  the  race  or  perhaps  upon  the 
country. 

It  has  been  said  that  there  exists  an  internal  connec- 
tion between  the  major  and  minor  key  and  our  feelings  of 
pleasure  and  pain.     If  this  were  so,  savages  ought  to  sing 

1  Bonwick,  /.  c,  p.  32  ;  Rev.  G.  W.  Torrance,  /.  c,  p.  355  ;  Howitt, 
/.  c,  p.  327;  Topinard,  Austral.,  p.  72. 

-  Turner,  /.  c,  p.  135.  ^Langsdorf,  /.  c,  i.  p.  160. 

*  Soyaux,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  174. 

SRatzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  516.  (So  also  in  Dar  Fertit,  N.W.  of  Albert 
Nj'anza). 

*  Burton,  Lake  Rtg.,  East  Africa,  ii.  p.  291. 

''  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  141.  **  Marsden,  /.  c,  p.  196. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I47 

mostly  in  the  major  key,  as  they  sing  more  frequently  on 
merry  occasions,  and  they  ought  to  sing  invariably  in 
minor  on  sad  occasions.  This,  however,  is  not  the  case. 
Bancroft  says  of  the  natives  of  South  Mexico  that  their 
jolly  songs  are  sad  and  the  merriest  music  melancholic.^ 
I  confess  I  cannot  fancy  how  jolly  music  can  be  at  the 
same  time  sad  ;  it  evidently  only  appears  to  us  sad,  and 
that  proves  that  an  objective  opinion  as  to  the  character 
of  this  music  can  hardly  be  given.  In  Australia,  says 
Lumholtz,  women  and  men  sing  mostly  in  the  wood,  but 
hardly  in  the  camp.  They  are  gay  and  happy,  but  their 
songs  are  melancholy  and  in  excellent  harmony  .with  the 
sombre  nature  of  Australia.-  [Mus.  Ex.  22  and  23.] 
Now,  this  statement  does  not  point  to  a  connection  with 
the  mood  and  disposition  of  our  mind,  but  with  external 
nature.  This  external  nature  as  such,  however,  cannot 
be  sad  or  merry  ;  it  only  appears  so  to  us,  i.e.,  we  are  sad 
or  merry,  and  the  Australians  themselves  evidently  are 
merry,  as  the  author  says,  so  I  cannot  see  any  correspon- 
dence between  a  certain  key  with  a  certain  disposition  of 
our  mind.  The  Tasmanians  were  a  merry  people  before 
the  war  with  the  English  began,  yet  they  sang  in  minor. 
The  Bahama  negroes  have  the  strange  custom  of  singing 
at  night  in  front  of  the  hut  of  a  dying  friend.  Men,  women 
and  children,  each  one  taking  some  part  in  the  harmony, 
sing  it  in  a  full  chorus.^     [Mus.   Ex.  9.] 

The  melody,  apart  from  the  words  and  the  scenery, 
seems  to  me  rather  a  merry  one,  although  it  is  certainly 
not  intended  to  be  so.  As  soon  as  I  imagine  the  whole 
scenery  and  the  occasion  on  which  it  is  sung,  the  same 
melody  at  once  assumes  a  sadder  character.  At  any  rate 
it  is  intended  to  be  sad,  but  it  is  in  major.  Baker  in  his 
above-mentioned  monograph  tried  to  show  that  Indian 
songs  are  invariably  in  minor  if  the  subject  is  a  sad  one, 

1  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  665.  -  Lumholtz,  l.  c,  p.  156. 

^  Edwards,  I.  c,  p.  525. 


148  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

and  in  major  if  it  is  a  merry  one.  In  most  cases,  however,, 
he  could  only  guess  at  the  mood  of  mind  from  the  words, 
and  it  was  not  at  all  certain  whether  they  did  not  admit 
of  more  than  one  interpretation  according  to  the  mood  of 
the  people  for  whom  they  were  destined. 

In  the  face  of  these  facts  we  may  say  primitive  men 
are  equally  familiar  with  the  minor  and  the  major  key, 
without  using  them  in  a  manner  corresponding  to  the  mood 
or  disposition  of  the  mind.  They  also  know  and  use 
harmonies  in  minor.  In  the  song  of  the  Asaba  (Niger) 
people,  who  sing  in  thirds,  a  preference  for  the  minor 
third  is  rather  noticeable,  especially  at  the  conclusions}  The 
natives  on  the  islands  Amsterdam  and  Middleburgh, 
where  it  is  the  custom  to  sing  in  two  parts,  had  a  song  in 
A  minor.  At  times  they  concluded  this  song  with  the 
A  minor  chord.'-'  [Mus.  Ex.  17.  This  occurrence  of 
minor  chords  in  savage  music  is  no  doubt  of  the  greatest 
importance,  and  will  have  to  be  taken  into  consideration 
in  further  researches  on  the  physiology  and  psychology  of 
music,  this  the  more  so,  as  Helmholtz  still  thought  it  was 
not  until  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  that 
people  began  to  use  minor  chords  in  concluding  a  song. 

We  have  refused  to  accept  the  theory  that  the  minor 
mode  necessarily  corresponds  to  a  sad  frame  of  mind.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  certain  that  the  effect  of  the  minor 
is  different  from  that  of  the  major.  Why  is  it  ?  It  is 
questionable  whether  savage  tribes  notice  any  peculiar 
difference.  The}-  will  sing  the  mode  best  fitting  to  their 
voice,  and  will  stick  to  this  mode  in  their  songs  without 
changing  it  in  any  striking  degree,  i.e.,  if  the  melody  has 
advanced  so  far  as  to  being  fixed  and  settled  at  all.  One 
mode,  once  in  use,  remains  so,  as  a  rule,  with  very  few 
exceptions.  In  music,  taken  as  modern  art,  the  case  is 
very  different.     In  works  of  art  the  minor  mode  has  been 

1  Day,  Niger,  p.  272.  -  Forster,  /.  c,  i.  p.  429. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I4gi 

the  more  seldom  used  up  to  the  beginning  of  this  century 
and  is  no  doubt  later  developed.  Therefore,  we  may  connect 
with  it  the  idea  of  the  unusual  and  may  use  it  on  occasions 
where  something  extraordinary  is  intended.  But  why  is 
it  that  it  came  in  use  so  late  and  was  formerly  so  seldom 
to  be  met  with  ?  The  reason  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the 
construction  of  our  instruments.  On  the  old  flutes  (even 
at  Handel's  time)  it  was  impossible  to  play  in  minor;  the 
trumpets  and  horns — at  that  time  without  valves — had 
only  the  so-called  natural  tones,  i.e.,  the  harmonic  upper 
tones,  which  are  all  in  major.  Of  course,  if  instruments 
of  different  pitch  were  employed  it  was  possible  by  a  clever 
combination  of  tones  to  have  minor  melodies  performed  ; 
but  this  was  too  complicated  an  arrangement  to  allow  of 
frequent  use  as  a  rule.  With  the  introduction  of  valves 
the  melody  in  minor  ceased  to  be  difficult,  and  the  minor 
key  became  as  frequent  in  modern  compositions  as  the 
major.  But  the  old  compositions  are  still  in  use  as  well, 
and  with  them  the  minor  mode  still  retained  something  of 
its  unusual  characters  which  is  thence  transferred  to  each 
single  chord  of  the  same  mode.  But  this  only  appeals  to 
the  accomplished  musician. 

There  is  still  one  question  to  be  answered  :  Why  do 
primitive  men  sing  in  different  modes  at  all  ?  To  this 
Dr.  Carter  Blake  said  :  ^  "  Minor  tunes  are  easier  than 
tunes  in  major  keys.  The  cries  of  children  and  street 
cries  are  proofs.""  I  do  not  think  that  this  proof  holds 
good.  If  children  cry,  it  is,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  neither  in 
major  nor  in  minor.     The  street  cries  for  which  towns  like 

1  jfoiirii.  Antli.  Inst.,  vol.  i.  p.  xxviii. 

-  Joseph  Kaines  (ibid.)  corrects  this  opinion  by  saying  :  "  The  child  feels 
pain,  and  it  awakens  attention  to  itself  by  crying  out ;  the  street  crier  utters 
his  burthen  for  the  same  end.  The  fact  of  pain  or  deprivation  in  both  cases 
is  expressed  in  the  only  natural  way — by  the  minor  key."  This  theory  has 
been  already  objected  to.  Moreover,  both  children  and  street  criers  cry  in 
the  same  way  if  they  are  happy.  I  never  noticed  that  they  changed  the 
key  in  such  cases. 


150  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

London  and  Paris  are  still  famous  do  not  allow  of  any 
musical  annotation  in  many  cases  because  the  tones  are 
not  distinct  enough.  In  other  cases  they  are  distinct,  but 
the  musical  phrase  is  too  short  (two  to  three  tones)  to 
allow  of  one  harmonisation  onl}-.  The  remaining  instances 
of  street  cries  are  collected  in  W.  Gardiner's  book  Music 
in  Nature.  Of  seventeen  quoted  examples  only  one  is  in 
minor. 

Dr.  Miiller  was  of  opinion  that  among  nearly  all 
nations  the  popular  songs  sound  as  if  they  were  in  the 
minor  key.  ^  Helmholtz,  however,  was  told  by  an  ex- 
perienced teacher  of  singing  that  pupils  of  only  moderate 
musical  talent  have  much  more  difficulty  in  hitting  the 
minor  than  the  major  third.-  Again,  Spohr  says  that 
country  people  intone  the  third  rather  sharp,  the  fourth 
still  sharper,  and  the  seventh  rather  flat.'^  This  divergenc}' 
of  opinion  is  only  explicable  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  the 
different  authors  spoke  of  different  races,  and  I  think, 
indeed,  that  a  peculiar  mode  of  singing  depends  upon  a 
peculiar  quality  of  the  organ  of  voice  ;  I  mean  originally, 
as  with  little  training  we  are,  as  a  rule,  equally  fitted  to 
sing  either  of  the  two  modes.  It  is  with  the  voice  as  with 
the  lips  in  playing  a  wind  instrument :  weak  lips  intone 
each  interval  rather  flat.  It  is  also  the  uncertainty  of 
intonation  and  the  constant  fluctuation  of  the  voice  which 
give  us  the  impression  of  the  minor  key  rather  than  of  the 
major.  Mr.  Gilman  noticed  that  in  the  Zufii  melodies  the 
indecision  of  the  singer  between  the  minor  and  major  third 
was  a  striking  feature  of  all  the  Zufii  music*  (Mexico). 
Mr.  Stumpf  says  of  the  Bellacula  Indians  that  they  raised 
the  pitch  to  half-a-tone  when  the  excitement  increased, 
while   the  intervals  of  the  minor  third   were  widened  to 

'  Miiller,  /.  c,  p.  161  ;  he  says:  "  Die  Terz  klingt  unbestimmt  zwischen 
der  grosser!  und  kleinen  Terz  ". 

-Helmholtz,  /.  c,  p.  302.  ^  Spohr,  /.  c,  i.  p.  257. 

•^  Gilman,  /.  c,  p.  gi. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  15I 

major  thirds.^  This  shows  that  the  two  keys  do  not 
correspond  to  two  different  quahties  of  feeling  (of  pleasure 
and  pain),  but  merely  to  the  increasing  and  decreasing  of 
it,  quite  independent  of  its  quality.  Mr.  Lichtenstein  also 
noticed  the  indecision  between  the  major  and  minor  third 
(neutrale  Terz)  in  the  singing  of  the  Hottentots,^  and  Day 
says  that  the  neuter  third  perhaps  occurs  in  the  songs  of 
the  Asaba  (Niger)  people.^ 


3.   THE  SCALE. 

The  scale  is  a  melodious  type  of  a  peculiar  mode. 
Long  before  we  are  able  to  speak  of  a  regular  scale, 
peculiar  intervals  seem  to  be  especially  chosen  in  singing 
and  in  instruments  in  preference  to  others,  and  yet  we 
are  by  no  means  justified  in  regarding  every  succession 
of  tones  or  intervals  as  a  systematic  scale.  This  was 
especially  the  case  in  primitive  times,  when  the  melody 
was  too  fluctuating  to  allow  of  distinct  tones  and  a 
systematic  order.  Still,  in  some  examples  of  primitive 
songs,  and  above  all  in  instruments,  we  may  notice  that 
some  intervals  were  more  in  favour  than  others,  and  thus 
the  frequent  use  of  a  certain  succession  of  tones  may  have 
influenced  the  formation  of  a  regular  scale.  Which  were 
these  intervals  ? 

An  ancient  pipe  from  the  stone  age  (illustrated  by 
Fetis)  shows  the  first  four  tones  {i.e.,  one  of  the  equal 
halves)  of  the  diatonic  scale.  An  instrument  from  ancient 
Mexico,  called  by  Baker  "  Schalmei,"  has  the  first  five 
tones  of  the  diatonic  scale  in  major;  ^  the  ancient  flutes  of 
the  Iroquois  had  the  first  five  to  six  tones  of  the  diatonic 
scale  in  minor ;  in  some  instances  it  was  possible  to  play 
their  higher  octave  as  well.^     The  guitar,  nanga,  of  the 

1  Stumpf,  Bel.  Iiid.,  p.  408.  -Lichtenstein  (Germ,  ed.,  ii.  p.  550). 

^Day,  Niger,  p.  272.  "^  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  57. 

^  Ibid.,  p.  55. 


152  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Karagwe  tribe  is  described  by  Grant  as  having  seven 
strings,  six  of  which  form  a  "  perfect  scale  ".^  I  suggest 
diatonic  scale,  as  otherwise  a  different  meaning  of  the 
word  scale  would  have  been  mentioned.  A  syrinx  of  stone 
from  ancient  Peru  had  the  following  succession  of  tones  :  - 
E,  F  sharp,  G,  A,  D,  C  sharp,  F,  A.  The  Balafong  in 
Senegambia  had,  according  to  Engel,  fourteen  key-boards 
on  which  the  minor  scale  could  be  played  through  two 
octaves  and  a  half.  Mr.  Ellis,  however,  measured  the 
bars  again,  and  found  that  bars  five  to  six  gave  a  very 
fairly  correct  minor  scale  without  the  leading  note,^  The 
tamul  in  Ceylon  had  the  diatonic  scale,-*  perhaps  influenced 
by  the  heptatonic  scales  of  ancient  Hindu  music. ^  The 
Onge  tribes  appear  to  have  our  diatonic  intervals,  but  we 
know  little  of  them.  The  songs  conclude  in  what  Portman 
assumes  to  be  the  tonic,  but  which  is  in  reality  the  second 
note  of  the  scale.^  The  songs  of  the  Bellacula  Indians 
Stumpf  quoted  "^  are  founded  partly  on  the  pentatonic, 
partly  on  the  heptatonic  system.  Finally,  the  old  Egyptian 
flutes  which  were  brought  to  London  two  years  ago,  and 
which  have  been  calculated  to  date  from  the  year  3000  B.C., 
had  a  complete  diatonic  scale. '^ 

Let  us  first  settle  the  fact  that  a  succession  of  tones 
exactly  corresponding  to  our  diatonic  scale  (or  a  part  of 
it)  occurs  in  instruments  in  the  stone  age,  and  that  we 
have  no  reason  to  conclude  that  a  period  of  pentatonic 
scales  necessarily  preceded  the  period  of  heptatonic  ones.^ 

1  Grant,  /.  c,  p.  183.  -  Traill,  /.  c,  p.  12S. 

•'Engel,  Mus.  Aiic.  Nat.,  p.  13  ;   Ellis,  Var.  Sc,  I.  c,  p.  507. 

■*  Nell,  /.  c,  p.  201  ;  Joinville,  /.  c,  p.  440. 

'Chrysander,  /.  c,  p.  28.  "  Portman,  /.  c,  p.  185. 

''  Stumpf,  /.  c,  p.  425. 

s  Wilkinson  also  mentions  that  the  diatonic  as  well  as  the  pentatonic 
scale  was  in  use  in  ancient  Egypt  (I.  c,  i.  p.  487).  An  Egyptian  pipe  of  the 
British  Museum  has  the  tones  C,  D,  E,  F,  F  sharp. 

"Engel  said  in  his  Mus.  Anc.  Nat.,  p.  16,  that  the  diatonic  scale  is  to 
be  found  at  the  time  of  the  most  primitive  culture  ;  it  is  not  the  only  one. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I53 

Helmhultz  was  of  opinion  "that  not  merely  the  com- 
position of  perfect  musical  works  of  art,  but  even  the 
construction  of  our  S}'stem  of  scales,  keys,  chords,  etc., 
is  the  work  of  artistic  invention,  and  hence  must  be 
subject  to  the  laws  of  artistic  beauty''.^  He  bases  this 
assertion  upon  the  historical  presumption  that  "  mankind 
has  been  at  work  on  the  diatonic  system  for  more  than 
2500  years,  since  the  days  of  Terpander  and  Pythagoras, 
and  that  the  same  properties  of  the  human  ear  could 
serve  as  the  foundation  of  very  different  musical  systems  ". 
But  when  Helmholtz  wrote  these  lines  some  of  the  most 
important  discoveries  were  not  made,  and  the  old  Egyptian 
iiutes  having  a  diatonic  scale  (2000  B.C.)  completely  sur- 
prised the  musical  world.  In  face  of  these  facts,  I  think,  we 
shall  have  to  modify  our  theories  accordingly,  and  may  say  : 
It  was  this  diatonic  succession  of  tones  which,  as  the 
most  practical,  has  remained  stationary  up  to  the  present 
time,  and  has  been  the  constant  basis  in  the  development 
of  music  to  the  high  standard  it  reached  in  the  seventeenth 
to  nineteenth  centuries.  All  the  other  systematic  attempts 
at  a  scale  either  made  a  successful  development  of  music 
impossible,  or  the}'  degraded  it  from  its  rank  as  an  art  to 
a  mere  intellectual  trifle.- 

Another  theory  according  to  which  men  in  constructing 
the  scale  gradually  proceeded  from  a  succession  of  larger 
intervals  (chiefly  the  pentatonic  scale)  to  the  comparatively 
small  ones  of  the  diatonic  scale  is  not  in  accordance  with 


"  but  less  artificial  than  theorists  have  frequently  declared  it  to  be  ".  Hipkins 
says  (in  Day,  Hind.  Miis.,  p.  x.) :  "  In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge 
it  is  impossible  to  affirm  that  a  pentatonic  scale  is  of  greater  antiquity  than 
a  heptatonic,  or  that  a  chromatic  scale  preceded  an  enharmonic  composed 
of  quarter  tones  ".  Stumpf  (/.  c,  p.  426):  "  Es  scheint,  dass  geradezu  in 
alien  Welttheilen  und  zn  alien  Zcitcn  solche  5  stufige  Leitern  in  verchiedener 
Form  sich  finden  ".     Compare  Ellis's  statement,  Var.  Sc,  p.  19. 

1  Helmholtz,  /.  c,  p.  366. 

-  Chinese  music  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  ours  as  writing  does  to 
drawing. 


154  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

ethnological  facts.  On  the  contrary,  many  savages  con- 
stantly use  smaller  intervals  than  we  do.  According  to 
Davis  Australian  savages  and  Maoris  use  quarter  tones, 
and  I  may  add  that  Davis  was  very  careful  in  obtaining 
the  correct  notes,  inasmuch  as  he  used  a  monochord 
especially  constructed  for  this  purpose.^  The  natives  of 
Nukahiwa  also  sing  in  quarter  tones.-  The  Arabs  seem 
to  be  still  more  particular  in  distinguishing  sharps  and 
flats  than  we  are.  The  equal  third  and  quarter  tones  of 
the  Arabs,  Villoteau  mentions,  are  no  doubt  a  mistake. 
Kosegarten  ^  affirms  that  Villoteau  constantly  mixes  up 
the  Arabian  and  Persian  musical  system,  and  so  does 
Kiesewetter  in  his  treatise  on  Arabian  music^  According 
to  Fleischer,  however, "*  the  Persian  and  Arabic  music 
system  cannot  possibly  be  separated,  while  Arabic  and 
Egyptian  music  have  nothing  in  common.  All  these 
questions  were  at  last  settled  by  Land  {Ganime  Arabe, 
I.  c).  He  says  Arabe  lutenists  had  seventeen  notes  within 
the  octave,  strictly  distinguishing  between  flats  and  sharps. 
Out  of  this  mass  of  tones  they  formed  diatonic  scales 
according  to  our  principle  \\ith  flats  only  or  with  sharps 
onl}- ;  thus  they  distinguished  the  C  sharp  major  scale 
from  the  D  flat  major  scale  in  practice,  while  we  distinguish 
it  merely  in  theory.  The  equal  division  of  equal  quarter 
tones  (twenty-four  altogether)  is  of  later  date  and  still  to 
be  met  with.''  In  Sumatra  the  interval  of  an  octave  is 
divided  into  six  tones  without  intermediate  half  tones. ^ 
The  melodies  similar  to  those  of  Ireland  generally  have 

1  Grey,  /.  c.  (musical  examples).         -  Langsdorf,  i.  p.  i6o. 

^  /.  c,  p.  142.  J  Kosegarten,  p.  145. 

•''  Fleischer,  /.  c,  p.  501. 

^  Compare  E.  Smith,  /.  c,  p.  177  ;  mus.  e.xampl.,  Christianowitch,  /.  c. 
vSalvador  Daniel  (/.  c,  pp.  48-49) :  "  Les  tiers  et  des  quarts  de  ton  dans  la 
musique  des  Arabes  ont  entiferement  erronnee  et  due  a  I'emploi  des  certain 
gammes.  Ces  gammes  ont  un  des  modes  d'ornamentation  les  plus  usites, 
surtout  par  les  chanteurs  et  les  violonistes." 

"  Marsden,  /.  c,  p.  195. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  155 

the  minor  third  instead  of  the  major.  On  their  primitive 
viohn  the  natives  play  in  our  division.  The  Chinese 
know  and  practically  use  the  pentatonic  and  heptatonic 
scale.  The  southern  and  rural  people  use  the  former,  the 
northern  and  more  cultivated  circles  the  latter.^  This  has 
been  pointed  out  lately  in  an  excellent  paper  of  Mr. 
Oilman's.  To  his  researches  we  also  owe  the  most  im- 
portant statement,  that  just  as  the  Pythagorean  use  of  the 
progression  of  fifths  did  not  create  the  scale,  but  was  the 
result  of  the  Greek  scale  of  his  time,  so  in  China  the  same 
progression  became  the  foundation  of  theory  through  the 
fact  that  by  its  use  an  accurately  determinate  form  could 
be  given  to  the  scale  which  was  already  in  use  among 
them.'  In  Java  the  instruments  have  the  pentatonic 
scale, '^  but  Dr.  Crotch  asserts  that  all  the  real  native 
music  of  Java  is  composed  in  a  common  enharmonic 
scale.^  Mr.  Ellis,  in  his  excellent  paper  on  The  Scale 
of  Various  Nations,  sufficiently  proved  that  pentatonic 
scales  do  not  necessarily  arise  from  inability  to  appreciate 
semitones,  and  that  some  of  the  existing  pentatonic  scales 
may  be  formed  by  omission  from  scales  of  seven  tones.^ 
In  consequence  of  all  these  facts  we  have  to  abandon  the 
theory  that  a  period  of  pentatonic  scales  preceded  the 
present  period  of  diatonic  scales.  Mr.  Helmholtz  himself 
seems  to  be  in  favour  of  this  modification  of  his  former 
theory,  as  the  new  English  edition  of  his  celebrated  book 
on  The  Sensation  of  Tones  contains  all  the  valuable  material 
that  Mr.  Ellis  brought  together  to  support  the  new  theory 
of  the  scale. 

The  above-mentioned  facts  also  show  the  impossibility 
of  founding  the  structure  of  the  scale  entirely  upon  any 
natural  properties  of  the  ear,  or  on  the  laws  of  the  con- 

1  Oilman,  Chiu.  Miis.,  p.  62  ;  Williams,  MidiH.  Kgdiii.,  2nd  edit.,  ii. 
P-  95- 

-Oilman,  /.  c,  pp.  157-158.  ^  Crawfurd,  i.  p.  339. 

'  Ibid.  5  Ellis,  Scale  of  Vav.  Nat.,  p.  526. 


156  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

stitution  of  musical  sound.  Therefore  some  other  authors 
tried  to  found  the  scale  upon  the  natural  structure  of  our 
organ  of  voice.  Thus  Engel  considered  the  pentatonic 
scale  as  being  easier  for  children  (and  primitive  people) 
than  the  diatonic.  Others,  as  Waterhouse,  went  as  far 
back  as  to  the  animal  kingdom,  and  there  they  found  the 
hylobates  agilis  singing  the  chromatic  scale. ^  This  gibbon 
(it  was  a  female)  achieved  the  chromatic  scale  admirably, 
effecting  especially  the  descent  with  great  precision.  This 
is  the  more  remarkable  "as  the  chromatic  scale  is  not  an 
easy  task  even  to  the  human  vocalist  ".  The  gibbon  started 
from  an  E,  ascending  to  the  upper  octave  and  descending 
again,  always  sounding  the  lower  E  almost  simultaneously 
with  the  upper  note,  whatever  that  note  might  have  been. 
Mr.  Claude  Trevelyan  assures  us  that  the  pentatonic  scale 
is  not  only  "  natural "  to  some  men  but  also  to  some 
animals,  such  as  a  Scotch  terrier,  Persian  cats,  and 
cuckoos."-  Not  being  a  zoologist  I  may  be  excused  for 
taking  the  humorous  side  of  this  latter  statement  without 
considering  it  as  in  any  way  important  from  a  scientific 
point  of  view."^ 

I  think  that  the  human  voice  equally  admits  of  any 
pentatonic  or  heptatonic  intervals,  and  very  likelv  we 
should  never  have  got  regular  scales  if  we  had  depended 
upon  the  ear  and  voice  only.  The  first  and  unique  cause 
to  settle  the  type   of  a  regular  scale  is  the  instrument.'* 


'Darwin,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  299  and  358:  "Professor  Owen,  who  is  a 
musician,  confirms  the  foregoing  statement".  Notes  given  by  W.  C.  L. 
Martin,  Gen.  Intro,  to  Nat.  Hist.  Mamm.,  1841,  p.  432. 

-yourn.  Soc.  Arts,  3rd  April,  1885,  p.  555. 

■^  I  entirely  agree  with  Stumpf's  criticism  of  this  statement:  "  Als  Satire 
auf  neutrale  Terzen  konnte  einer  diese  Bemerkungen  geistreich  finden. 
Ich  fiirchte  aber,  sie  sind  ernsthaft  gemeint,  und  dann  sind  sie  erst  recht  zum 
Lachen  "  {Vicrtclj.  Mitsikw.,  ii.  p.  523). 

^  "  Whenever  an  instrument  is  made,  there  must  always  be  established 
something  more  of  certainty  than  belongs  to  such  vague,  wandering  sounds  "' 
(Chorley,  /.  c,  p.  15).      Attempts  to  found  the  structure  of  the  scale  on  the 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I57 

To  obtain  a  scale  the  oldest  instrument  we  know  (the 
bone,  or  reed-pipe)  is  at  the  same  time  best  fitted,  as  it 
does  not  admit  of  any  change  in  the  intervals.  This 
heptatonic  and  diatonic  succession  of  tones  is  indeed  the 
most  practicable  and  most  simple  for  pla}ing  instruments, 
always  bearing  in  mind  that  the  oldest  instrument  is  the 
pipe.  On  a  pipe  the  player  cannot  possibly  make  reason- 
able use  of  more  than  eight  holes,  as  he  has  not  more 
fingers  free  to  handle  them,  and  he  will  very  likely  not  be 
skilled  enough  to  handle  them  with  all  four  fingers  of  each 
hand,  but  with  three  only.  Now,  if  on  a  short  pipe  six 
holes  are  pierced  at  equal  distances  within  the  limit  of  one 
octave,  the  result  will  always  be  the  diatonic  scale.  This 
limit  of  an  octave  is  a  natural  one  (not  for  the  sound,  the 
ear  or  the  voice,  but  for  the  player),  as  every  player 
notices  that  he  gets  the  higher  octave  of  each  tone  without 
any  fingering,  simply  by  blowing  with  greater  force  of 
breath.  In  speaking  of  equal  distances  of  the  holes  (not 
of  the  intervals)  I  am  quite  aware  that  in  a  modern  fiute 
the  piercing  and  arrangement  of  the  holes  for  the  diatonic 
scale  is  not  at  all  as  easy  as  one  might  think.  But  in  a 
primitive  pipe  this  difficulty  does  not  exist.  For  the  same 
reason,  i.e.,  the  simplicity  of  the  construction,  the  use  of 
smaller  intervals  than  half-tones  would  be  impossible  even 
in  more  refined  instruments,  such  as  the  modern  violin. 
I  should  like  to  see  the  fingering  of  a  modern  violinist  if 
he  had  to  play  quarter  or  third  tones.  He  can  play  them, 
but  his  hand  would  not  be  able  to  execute  a  very  compli- 
cated composition.     Even  the  chromatic  system,  with  its 


construction  of  instruments  were  made  on  several  occasions  :  P.  Amiot  and 
later  on  Wagener  (/.  c,  pp.  48-52)  founded  the  pentatonic  scale  upon  the  pan- 
pipe. Stumpf  once  arrived  at  the  conclusion  :  "  Die  meisten  Leitern  sind 
nicht  auf  das  Gehor,  sondern  auf  eine  mathematisch-mechanische  Saitenein- 
theilung  gegrundet "  [Vicrt.  Mits.,  ii.  p.  523).  I  myself  brought  forward 
the  theory  that  the  construction  of  the  scale  is  founded  on  the  construction 
of  instruments  in  Allg.  Mns.  Wochenschrift,  Dez.,  i8go. 


158  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

distinction  of  sharps  and  flats,  was  too  complicated  for 
instruments,  and  it  has  been  made  possible  only  by  a 
compromise  between  the  physicist  and  the  practical  player. 
The  chromatic  intervals  in  our  equal  temperament  are  indeed 
the  smallest  possible  intervals,  not  for  the  ear,  or  the  voice,  or 
the  laws  of  sounds,  hut  for  a  practicable  instrument. 

We  owe  the  scale  not  to  nature  (voice,  ear,  laws  of 
sound  or  animals),  and  not  to  science  or  artificial  systems 
that  were  worked  upon  and  thought  out  for  centuries,  but 
to  the  practical  player  and  the  qualities  of  his  instrument. 
Definite  successions  of  tones  were  in  use  long  before  they 
became  regular  systematic  scales.  The  Shi-vo-la  song,  e.o;., 
is  composed  just  within  the  major  diatonic  scale,  while  the 
Du-me-chim-chee  may  be  viewed  as  composed  exactly  to 
cover  a  pentatonic  scale,  although  both  may  be  said  to 
embody  a  stage  in  the  development  of  the  art  before  the 
appearance  of  scales.^ 

That  the  simplicity  and  practicability  of  the  diatonic 
system  for  instruments  is  not  the  result  of  my  speculation 
only,  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  this  construction  occurred 
to  the  primitive  mind  of  the  man  of  the  stone  period.  Since 
then  many  other  attempts  have  been  made,  and  we  find 
sometimes  in  primitive  flutes  and  pipes  the  most  extra- 
ordinary arrangements  of  holes  ;  nevertheless,  from  the  time 
of  the  stone  age  up  to  the  present  day,  the  diatonic  division 
has  remained  triumphant  over  all  queer  experiments  of 
instrument  makers,  and  all  too  minute  and  detailed  specu- 
lations of  the  theorists. 

To  our  modern  musical  feeling  it  seems  appropriate 
to  begin  from  below  in  playing  the  scale,  then  to  gradually 
proceed  to  the  higher  octave,  whence  we  go  down  again 
to  the  original  key-note  to  finish  up  the  musical  picture. 
This  manner  of  beginning  and  ending  a  piece  does  not 
seem  to  be  innate  in  our  mind,  nor  is  it  the  only  natural 

1  Oilman,  ZiiTii  Mclod.,  p.  91. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  I59 

way.  The  Australians  for  instance  begin  from  above,  as 
we  have  seen,  and  leave  off  in  a  deep^  scarcely  audible 
note,^  even  in  examples  where  the  principle  of  tonality  is 
unmistakable.  Considering  this,  our  feeling  seems  to  be 
the  outcome  of  a  mere  habit  probably  originating  from 
playing  instruments  (wind  and  stringed),  where  the  deep 
tones  are  always  easier  to  produce  than  the  high  ones  and 
therefore  easier  to  begin  with.  After  all,  it  is  not  at  all 
offensive,  even  to  our  musical  feeling,  to  begin  the  scale 
from  above,  if  we  only  try  to  get  a  little  used  to  it. 

4.    MUSIC    NOTES   AND   RHYTHMIC    DIVISION. 

It  has  often  been  supposed  that  the  music  of  savage 
races  is  all  in  regular  duple  time.  The  quoted  example's, 
however,  prove  the  contrary.  It  is  of  course  difficult  to 
say  whether  the  triple  or  the  duple  time  is  the  more 
frequent,  as  we  can  never  say  by  hearing  a  song  whether 
it  has,  e.g.,  four  j  bars  or  one  ^  bar  with  trioles.  However 
this  may  be,  primitive  music  can  be  committed  to  notes 
in  duple  as  well  as  in  triple  time.  In  many  instances  the 
change  between  those  two  divisions  is  so  sudden  and 
frequent  that  we  have  to  note  down  the  f  time.  Thus  a 
war-song  of  the  Sudanese,  sung  before  they  go  off  to 
battle,  is  noted  down  by  Mr.  Zollner  in  f  time.-  Mr. 
Stumpf,  in  his  as  usual  very  careful  observations  on  some 
songs  of  the  Bellacula  Indians,  suggests  that  a  notation 
in  i  time  would  at  times  probably  be  the  most  appropriate.^ 
Some  songs  of  the  Kwakiutl  Indians  (British  Columbia) 
are  sung  in  a  five-part  bar,  which — according  to  Boas — 
frequently  occurs  in  the  music  of  these  tribes.^  Several 
of  the  melodies  of  the  Asaba  people  Capt.  Day  collected 
employ  a  mixed  time  of  alternate  bars  of  triple  and  common 

^  Schlirmann,  /.  c,  p.  242.  -  Zollner,  /.  c,  p.  447. 

•'Stumpf,  Bcllac.  Ind.,  p.  409. 

^  Boas,  /.  c,  p.  51,  mus.  exampl.,  p.  59. 


l6o  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

time.^  Mr.  Baker  noticed  that  the  Indians  in  singings 
never  marked  the  beginning  of  a  bar  but  only  the  rhythm 
in  general.  On  the  other  hand,  he  said  that  only  five  of 
thirty-two  collected  examples  were  in  triple  time.-  As  the 
bars,  however,  are  not  marked  in  singing,  his  division  is 
either  a  mere  voluntary  one  or  the  first-named  observation 
is  not  quite  correct. 

Mr.  C.  Engel  in  his  days  expressed  the  opinion  that 
the  North  American  Indians  had  music  notes.^  The  two 
examples  he  quotes  •*  do  not,  however,  contain  any  music 
notes  but  only  signs  for  the  words  to  the  songs — in  one 
word,  they  are  a  kind  of  rough  picture  writing.  He 
evidently  mistook  the  general  poetical  sense  of  the  word 
song  for  the  specific  musical  one,  while  he  did  not  seem 
to  have  thoroughly  examined  the  signs  themselves,  in  spite 
of  his  illustrating  them  too.  Mr.  Kohl  himself  says  he 
believes  he  can  show  that  the  Indians  have  discovered 
something  which  may  be  called  notes. ^  The  way  he 
obtained  these  notes  is  so  peculiar  that  it  may  be  well  to 
give  his  investigation  with  all  the  accompanying  details. 
He  asked  an  old  Indian,  whose  name  was  Kitagignan,  or 
the  "  spotted  feather,"  to  show  the  Indian  birch  bark 
books  and  songs  and  to  sing  them  to  him.  Upon  this  the 
Indian  went  away  from  the  wigwam  with  Mr.  Kohl,  sat 
down  at  a  lonely  place,  laid  the  birch  bark  on  his  lap,  and 
pointing  with  the  finger  to  the  signs  he  began  to  explain 
them.  This  sign,  he  said,  signifies  that  the  same  voice 
and  the  same  tune  continue,  that  one  is  a  kind  of  note 
that  the  voice  shall  go  up,  others  mean  nothing  further 
than  that  they  show  me  how  I  shall  go  on  singing.  Up 
to  this  time  the  Indian  had  only  spoken,  and  on  Mr.  Kohl's 
insisting  upon  an  actual  song,  the  Indian  began  to  mutter 

1  Day,  Niger,  p.  274,  fn.  -  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  pp.  42-43. 

■'C.  Engel,  Mns.of  Anc.  Nat.,  p.  179. 

■>  Kohl,  /.  c,  i.  p.  2i6  ;  Catlin,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  248. 

•'  Kohl,  /.  i\,  ii.  p.  84. 


THE    BASIS    OF    OUR    MUSICAL    SYSTEM.  l6l 

in  a  trembling  voice  apparently  frightened  and  finally 
bathed  in  perspiration.  All  this  while  his  finger  pointed 
to  the  notes,  and  he  raised  and  lowered  it  in  accord  with 
his  voice  so  as  to  give  Mr.  Kohl  the  impression  "  that 
there  could  not  possibly  be  notes  for  every  tone"  (p.  gi). 
How  Mr.  Kohl,  nevertheless,  came  to  tell  us  he  obtained 
the  Indian  music  notes  I  could  not  make  out  at  all,  the 
related  story  proving  anything  but  this.  Mr.  Schoolcraft 
speaks  still  more  expressly  of  "  Mnemonic  symbols  for 
music"  and  "musical  annotation";^  he  illustrates  the 
signs  and  yet  overlooks  their  being  a  sort  of  picture  writing 
that  indicates  the  text  only.  Mr.  Engel,  too,  illustrates 
the  same  signs "  without  noticing  what  they  actually 
contain.  Mr.  Tylor  alone  recognises  that  these  signs  of 
Schoolcraft's  merely  serve  "to  suggest  to  the  mind  the 
successive  verses  ".^ 

In  a  private  letter  to  Th,  Baker*  Mr.  Eugene  Vetro- 
mile  stated  that  the  Indians  had  no  musical  annotation 
nor  any  signs  to  indicate  definite  tones,  the  singers  easily 
remembering  all  the  songs.  One  of  them  (A-o-don-we) 
assured  him  that  he  without  difficulty  retained  in  memory 
eighty-nine  different  songs  which  he  used  to  sing  always 
in  the  same  order  at  the  harvest  festival. 

Messrs.  David  and  Lussy  also  say:  "II  n'est  pas 
admissible,  que,  dans  le  temps  prehistoriques  .  .  .  les 
hommes  aient  con9u  I'idee  d'un  arrangement  systematique 
des  sons  a  plus  forte  raison  d'une  ecriture  phonetique  ". 
Unlike  the  majority  of  music  writers,  they  go  so  far  as  to 
say  that  not  even  the  Egyptians,  Chaldeans,  Phoenicians 
and  Hebrews  had  music  notes.  "  C'est  I'alphabet  qui  a 
fourni  aux  premiers  peuples  les  elements  graphiques  servant 
k  la  represantation  des  sons.  Nous  le  voyonz  chez  les 
Hindous,  les    Chinois  et   les  Grecs.       Nous   ne  trouvons 

1  Schoolcraft,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  226.  -  Engel,  Nat.  Miis.,  p.  337. 

=^  Tylor,  Res.  Earl.  Hist.,  p.  85. 

^  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  49  ;  Fewkes,  Sum.  dr.,  p.  277. 
II 


l62  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

rien  de  semblable  chez  les  E^yptiens,  les  Assyrians,  les 
Babyloniens,  qui  pourtant  ne  leur  etaient  pas  interrieurs 
en  civilisation."  ^  Mr.  Engel,  nevertheless,  holds  that 
"judging  from  analogy  we  may  conjecture  that  Assyrians, 
Egyptians  and  Hebrews  had  musical  signs  ".-  This  "  ana- 
logy "  is,  however,  quite  inappropriate,  for  Mr.  Niebuhr, 
who  travelled  in  the  east  at  the  end  of  the  last  century, 
remarks  :  "  Neither  in  Egypt,  nor  in  Arabia  or  India  did 
they  understand  how  to  commit  music  to  writing.  Although 
it  was  said  that  the  great  artists  in  Constantinople  had 
secret  musical  signs,  I  did  not  come  across  anybody 
there  who  knew  music  notes,  not  even  among  the  der\-ishes 
of  the  order  Mevlaui,  who  were  known  for  the  greatest 
composers  of  the  Turks."  ^ 

1  David  and  Lussy,  /.  c,  p.  2.  -  Engel,  Nat.  Miis..  p.  179. 

•'  Niebuhr,  /.  c,  i.  p.  175. 


CHAPTER  V. 

PHYSICAL  AND  PSYCHICAL  INFLUENCE  OF  MUSIC. 

Among  savages  the  influence  of  music  is  far  more  distinctly 
noticeable  than  among  people  in  a  higher  state  of  civilisa- 
tion. We  cannot  say  that  it  is  always  stronger  and  deeper, 
nor  does  it  seem  to  last  for  a  long  time,  but  it  is  brought 
to  light  in  a  more  naive  and  natural  way,  and  is  therefore 
a  more  suitable  and  welcome  object  of  psychological  obser- 
vation. 

It  is  certainly  not  a  mere  accidental  coincidence  of 
circumstances  when  some  African  tribes  dance  and  sing 
more  frequently  at  the  time  of  the  "  palm  wine  season," 
or  when  the  Ainu  on  the  island  of  Yezo  dance  more  at 
the  opening  of  the  hunting  and  fishing  season.^  The 
Bechuanas  indulge  in  singing  more  especially  at  the  time 
of  the  rains  and  of  the  harvest.-  Burchell  supposes  that 
this  custom  has  its  origin  in  those  feelings  of  gladness 
which  would  be  so  naturally  excited  by  the  fall  of  copious 
and  frequent  showers  in  a  land  where  all  hopes  of  an 
abundant  crop  of  corn  depend  wholly  on  the  quantity  of 
rain.  The  Lincoln  tribes  in  Australia  do  not  allow  a 
single  evening  to  pass  without  singing;  on  these  occasions 
their  features  show  such  unmistakable  signs  of  joy  and 
happiness  that  one  would  scarcely  believe  how  these 
good-natured  countenances  could  be  capable  of  the  highest 
expression  of  rage  and  fury.-^  It  is  remarkable  that  we 
sing   as  a   rule  more  frequently  in   consequence  of  plea- 

1  H.  V.  Siebold,  /.  c,  p.  48.  -  Burchell,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  599. 

•'  Schurmann,  /.  c,  p.  243. 

(163) 


164  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 


the  latter  case  the  lamentations  and  outcries  may  be  more 
striking  than  the  harmless  humming  of  a  man  in  good 
humour.  At  any  rate,  music  is  the  direct  and  immediate 
effect  of  the  feelings  of  the  moment,  and  this  may  be  seen 
with  "  savages  "  as  well  as  with  "  civilised  people  ".  I 
therefore  cannot  agree  with  Mr.  Barrow's  opinion  that 
dancing  and  singing  are  the  immediate  effect  of  pleasurable 
feelings,  only  in  the  state  of  very  primitive  culture,  while 
among  civilised  people  they  are  arts  which,  "  acquired  by 
study  (?)  and  practised  at  certain  times,  have  no  relation 
to  our  feeling".  I  am  almost  afraid  that  Mr.  Barrow 
mistook  the  typical  piano  lesson  for  the  art  of  music. ^ 

A  very  graphic  description  of  the  part  that  music 
plays  among  the  natives  of  Australia  is  given  b}-  G.  Grey: 
To  a  sulky  old  native,  his  song  is  what  a  quid  of  tobacco 
is  to  a  sailor  ;  if  he  is  angr}',  he  sings  ;  if  glad,  he  sings  ; 
if  hungry,  he  sings  ;  if  full,  pro\-ided  he  is  not  so  full  as  to 
be  in  a  state  of  stupor,  he  sings  more  lustily  than  ever.- 
The  peculiar  character  of  their  songs  renders  them  under 
all  circumstances  most  solacing  to  the  natives.  The  songs 
are  short,  generally  containing  only  one  or  two  ideas, 
constantly  repeated  over  and  over  again,  producing  much 
the  same  effect  that  the  singing  of  a  nurse  does  upon  a 
child.  To  us  these  songs  seem  barbarian  and  unmelo- 
dious,  but  the  Australians  like  them  and  have  in  turn  no 
appreciation  of  European  music.  Should  a  European 
endeavour  to  perform  his  music  before  them,  it  would  be 
laughed  at  "as  a  combination  of  silly  and  effeminate 
notes,"  and  for  weeks  afterwards  the  natives  would 
entertain  their  friends  by  mimicking  the  tone  and  attitude 
of  the  white  man,  an  exhibition  which  never  fails  to  draw 
down  loud  shouts  of  applause.  Sometimes,  however,  even 
they  seem   to    be  moved   sympathetically  by  our  music. 

^  Barrow,  /.  c,  i.  p.  14S. 

-Grey,  Two  Exp.  to  Aitstr.,  ii.  p.  300. 


PHYSICAL    AND    PSYCHICAL    INFLUENCE    OF    MUSIC.    165 

Thus  one  of  the  natives  burst  into  tears  when  he  heard 
"  God  save  the  Queen  ".  On  another  occasion  Mr.  Grey 
observed  during  a  funeral  the  great  effect  of  music  upon 
the  natives.  Even  those  infants  who  sat  passively  on 
their  mothers'  shoulders,  not  understanding  the  cause  of 
lament,  seemed  to  be  affected  as  the  involuntary  tears 
rolled  down  the  cheeks.^  This,  of  course,  may  be  mere 
reflective  imitation,  for  if  all  people  in  a  company  cry, 
children  will  always  cry  too,  even  without  music  ;  still  the 
grown-up  persons,  at  least,  seemed  to  express  their  sadness 
by  music,  and  then,  again,  to  be  more  deeply  moved  by 
hearing  it.  I  may  mention  that  the  Australians  are 
accustomed  to  quiet  their  children  by  music  if  they  cry."^ 
Another  example  of  the  influence  of  music  is  given  in  a 
narrative  of  Mr.  Peron  :  While  an  Australian  family  were 
taking  their  simple  meal  Mr.  Peron's  company  began  to 
sing  the  "  Marseillaise".  At  first  the  natives  seemed  more 
confused  than  surprised,  but  soon  listened  attentively. 
The  meal  was  forgotten  and  their  satisfaction  was  mani- 
fested by  contortions  and  gestures,  so  "  whimsical  "  that 
the  Europeans  could  hardly  refrain  from  laughing,  while 
it  was  equally  difficult  to  the  aborigines  to  hide  their 
enthusiasm.  But  scarcely  was  the  first  strophe  ended 
before  exclamations  of  rapture  were  uttered  by  every  one. 
A  young  man,  especially,  was  almost  frenzied ;  he  tore 
his  hair,  scratched  his  head  with  both  hands,  agitated 
himself  in  a  hundred  different  ways,  and  repeatedly 
iterated  his  approving  clamour.  After  this  vigorous  and 
warlike  song  the  Europeans  sang  some  "  light  and  tender 
airs"  but  soon  perceived  that  they  affected  the  natives 
but  in  a  slight  degree.-^ 

A  similar  exciting  influence  was  often  observed  when 
the  tamtam  v\'as  sounded,  of  whose  effect  we  gave  a  few 
examples  on  p.  io6.     Mr.  Du  Chaillu  noticed  this  among 

1  Grey,  Tzvo  Exp.  to  Austr.,  ii.  p.  331.  -  Gerland-Waitz,  /.  c,  vi.  p.  782. 

^  Peron,  /.  c,  p.  840. 


l66  PRIMITIVE    M'USIC. 

savages  on  his  travels  in  Equatorial  Africa.  No  sooner 
do  they  hear  the  tamtam  than  they  lose  all  control  over 
themselves,  and  the  louder  and  more  energetically  the 
instrument  is  beaten  the  wilder  are  the  jumps  of  the  male 
African,  and  the  more  disgustingly  indecent  the  contortions 
of  the  women.^  Mr.  Reade  observed  that  his  people 
always  began  to  sing  when  he  compelled  them  to  over- 
come their  natural   laziness  and  to  continue  rowing.- 

Skilled  singers  in  Greenland  well  know  how  to 
express  different  passions  by  soft  or  animated  tones  of  the 
drum  and  the  motions  of  their  body.  This  they  do  during 
a  banquet  which  lasts  for  several  nights,  until  all  pro- 
visions are  consumed  and  the  participants  too  exhausted 
to  articulate  any  longer.  He  who  can  make  the  drollest 
contortions  of  the  body  passes  for  the  ma.stev-smger.^ 

The  Indians  have  special  songs  for  the  time  of  mourn- 
ing as  well  as  for  the  time  of  pleasure,  for  leisure  hours 
as  well  as  for  the  hour  of  triumph.  Simple  and  rude  as 
the}-  ma\-  be,  thc\'  have  alwa\s  a  definite  character.  The 
required  expression  is,  however,  attained  b\'  variet}'  of 
time  rather  than  of  cadence.* 

\\'hen,  on  his  third  \oyage,  Columbus  landed  on 
Trinidad,  he  ordered  his  sailors  to  dance  on  board  a  ship 
to  the  sound  of  a  tambourine,  thinking  he  would  decoy  the 
Indians.  They  however  put  down  the  oars,  seized  their 
shield  and  bows,  shooting  at  the  ship  with  arrows.  Pos- 
sibly they  mistook  the  whole  affair  for  a  war-dance  and 
feared  mischief.^' 

The  savages  themselves  are  quite  aware  of  the  great 
power  of  music,  and  tr}-  to  make  use  of  it  whenever  a 
peculiar  emotional  effect  is  intended,  and  especially  so  in 
the  case  of  diseases.  The  primitive  physician  performs 
his  duty — strange  to  say — with  musical  accompaniment. 

1  Du  Chaillu,  Eqii.  Afr.,  p.  201.  -  Reade,  Sketch  B,  ii.  p.  313. 

3  Cranz,  /.  c,  i.  p.  163.  ■•  Sproat,  /.  c,  p.  63. 

''Columbus,  /.  c,  p.  III. 


PHYSICAL    AND    PSYCHICAL    INFLUENCE    OF    MUSIC.    167 

There  are,  it  is  true,  some  cases  where  it  seems  to  me 
doubtful  whether  an  emotional  effect  is  really  intended,  or 
whether  the  doctor  simply  uses  a  well-thought-out  bit  of 
humbug  which  he  is  able  to  express  in  a  more  naive  way 
than  his  European  colleague. 

W^hen  among  the  negroes  a  rich  man  calls  in  the 
doctor,  all  musicians  are  called  together,  surround  the 
patient,  and  play  on  instruments  day  and  night. ^  The 
negroes  do  not  think  this  is  worse  than  the  actual  disease. 
Among  the  Wasambara  in  East  Africa  the  doctor  comes 
with  a  small  bell  in  hand,  which  he  rings  from  time  to 
time.  The  patient  sits  before  him  on  the  ground,  and  the 
doctor  begins  in  a  singing  tone  :  "  Dabre,  dabre,"  which 
he  repeats  several  times,  to  which  the  patient  answers  : 
"Eh".-  The  Benguela  call  their  musical  doctor  Kim- 
bunda,-^  the  Lomami  call  him  Tawuli,  and  the  Zanzibaris 
Mganga.-^  The  Kafirs,  too,  have  their  musical  doctor.^ 
It  is  especially  the  ceremony  of  circumcision,  which  among 
some  tribes  is  seldom  passed  over  without  singing  and 
dancing.  The  Banshaka  decorate  themselves  on  such 
occasions  in  the  most  funny  way  with  leaves,  amulets,  and 
fetishes,  roar  and  caper  all  the  time,  clapping  hands  and 
making  altogether  an  infernal  noise. *"  In  Madagascar,  too, 
the  circumcision  is  celebrated  with  general  merry-making, 
during  which  the  "  happy  fathers  "  amuse  themselves  with 
singing,  dancing,  eating  and  drinking.''  In  South  Africa 
even  the  first  menstruation  of  a  girl  is  made  a  general 
festival,  celebrated  with  music.^ 

In  Australia  the  doctor  shakes  a  bundle  of  reeds,''  an 

1  Proyart,  /.  c,  p.  574. 

-  Krapf,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  116  (German  edition;  in  the  English  edition  this 
remartc  is  left  out). 

3  Magyar,  /.  c,  i.  p.  26.  *  Shooter,  /.  c,  p.  173  (edition,  1S53). 

5  Doehne,  /.  c,  p.  44. 

^  Lenz,  Skizzcii,  p.  301.     (Upper  Ogowe  River.) 

''  Pfeiffer,  Madag.,  p.  187.  ^  Macdonald,  /.  c,  p.  116. 

'■•  Schurmann  and  Teichelmann,  /.  c.  (1840),  part  ii. 


l68  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

action  otherwise  used  during  a  song  to  mark  the  time. 
At  Port  Jackson  Mr.  Hunter  saw  a  physician  who  did  not 
speak  or  sing  to  the  spirit  of  the  disease,  but  onh-  put  his 
mouth  near  the  sick  part  of  the  body.^  In  Borneo  the 
natives  perform  recitatives,  songs,  dances  and  processions 
in  order  to  catch  the  soul  of  the  patient,  which  is  supposed 
to  have  ran  away  before  the  evil  spirit.-  In  Tanna  (New 
Hebrides)  the  natives  believe  that  the  doctor  sends  the 
illness;  consequently  they  are  very  much  afraid  of  him, 
and  quite  overload  him  with  presents  when  they  think  he 
ceased  to  send  the  illness.^  The  obeah  or  medicine  man 
of  the  negroes  in  Jamaica  commences  his  cure  with  a 
dance,  which  he  himself  performs,  not  the  patient,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  tarantella."*  Surely,  very  few  European 
colleagues  would  be  a  match  for  him  in  this  respect. 

Among  the  North  American  Indians  the  doctor  is  a 
very  important  person.  He  is  in  the  most  cases  an  old 
woman,  not  in  a  figurative  sense,  but  in  reality.  With 
the  Wallawalla  Indians  a  medicine  woman  tries  to  expel 
the  illness  through  her  actions.  She  stands  over  the 
patient  singing  under  great  excitement  accompanied  by  a 
dozen  men  and  boys.  She  is  constantly  in  motion,  making 
all  kinds  of  grimaces,  falls  on  her  knees  and  pretends  to 
draw  out  the  bad  spirit  with  both  hands,  blowing  into 
them,  and,  as  it  were,  tossing  the  spirit  into  the  air.'' 
These  Indians  believe  that  singing  influences  the  cure  of 
a  patient,  so  that  all  convalescent  sick  are  directed  to 
sing  for  several  hours  during  the  day.  Thus  we  have 
many  reasons  for  wishing  those  Indians  good  health.*^ 
The  Mandans  (Missouri)  and  Minetaris  (Fall  Indians  of 
the  Hudson  Bay)  have  a  medicine  woman  who  dances, 
the  Moluches  (Chili)  and  Puelches  in  Patagonia  male 
and    female    doctors ;     the    former    wear    women's    dress, 

1  Hunter,  /.  c,  p.  476.  -  Hein,  /.  c,  p.  29. 

'Engel,  Miis.  Myths,  pp.  84-144.  ■*  Lewis,  /.  c,  p.  158. 

5  Wilkes,  /.  c,  iv.  p.  399.  "  Wied-Neuwied,  North  Am.,  ii.  p.  igo. 


PHYSICAL    AND    PSYCHICAL    INFLUENCE    OF    MUSIC.    l6g 

and  both  cure  the  patient  by  singing,  beating  a  drum,  and 
shaking  a  rattle.^  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  medicine 
man  of  the  Araucanians,  who  call  him  Gligna  or  Dugol.- 
In  British  Columbia  the  doctor  sings  when  he  visits  the 
patient,  while  a  chorus  of  other  people  intones  a  song 
outside  the  house,  and  beats  time  on  the  roof  of  the  house 
with  long  sticks.^  The  Manchi  or  medicine  man  of  the 
Pehuenches  (Indians  in  the  Argentine  provinces)  used  a 
sort  of  drum  in  his  musical  invocation,  with  which  he 
hoped  to  expel  the  evil  spirit.*  If  only  the  good  spirits 
too  would  not  be  frightened  away  ! 

One  of  the  most  important  occasions  on  which  music 
is  employed  is  during  childbirth.  It  is  hoped  that  by 
this  either  the  evil  spirit  is  expelled  or  the  patient 
encouraged.  Fortunately  this  event  passes  off  very  easily 
in  the  savage  world.  Should,  however,  this  not  be  the 
case,  the  poor  woman,  who  is  maltreated  and  bothered  in 
the  most  incredible  manner  and  suffers  considerabl}',  must 
allow  herself  to  be  also  treated  by  the  most  noisy  and 
discordant  music.  It  is,  of  course,  not  our  task  to  follow 
the  different  phases  of  this  act,  although  from  the  point 
of  view  of  ethnological  medicine  some  interesting  facts 
might  be  brought  to  light. ^  As  is  well  known  music  is 
employed  for  medical  purposes  up  to  this  time,  when, 
however,  some  involuntary  humour  can  scarcely  be 
avoided.*^  In  spite  of  this  we  can  say  music  has  an 
emotional  influence,  and  this  fact  remains  true  however 
funny  the  attempts  may  be  which  "  savage  "  or  "  civilised  " 
doctors  and  laymen  at  times  make  in  employing  music 
for  medical  purposes. 

'  Falkner,  /.  c,  p.  115.  -  Molina,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  105. 

•■'  Mayne,  /.  c,  p.  261.  •*  M'Cann,  /.  c,  i.  p.  iii. 

•''  I  refer  for  further  particulars  to  Ploss,  Das  Weib  and  Das  Kind. 
•^  Bibliography  by  Engel,  Miis.  Myths,  ii.  pp.  84-144. 


CHAPTER  V 


TEXT  AND  MUSIC. 


In  the  relation  of  text  and  music  there  seems  to  have  been 
Httle  change  from  time  immemorial.  It  would  be  just  as 
difficult  to  characterise  in  general  the  mutual  position  of 
both  in  the  songs  of  sa\ages,  as  it  is  to-day  to  arrive  at 
a  satisfactory  solution  of  the  question  as  to  the  rank  of 
poetry  and  music  when  united  in  a  single  art-work.  All 
depends  upon  the  quality  of  the  text,  and  in  primitive 
times  upon  the  development  of  language  as  well. 

The  most  striking  feature  of  all  the  savage  songs  is  the 
frequent  occurrence  of  words  with  no  meaning  whatever. 
This  we  have  found  in  the  choral  songs  of  the  Bushmen/ 
and  sometimes  in  those  of  the  Kafirs,-  although  the  latter 
also  possess  some  solo  songs  with  a  definite  subject. 

The  songs  of  the  Todas  (Nilgiri  Hills)  are  unlike  those 
of  other  hill  tribes  usually  devoid  of  any  signification,  or 
if  the\-  have  a  meaning  at  all  they  refer  merel}-  to  events 
of  recent  occurrence.^  The  Todas  speak  a  peculiar  dialect 
that  has  given  rise  to  all  sorts  of  mysterious  hypotheses 
as  to  their  origin.  According  to  Mr.  Metz,  however,  they 
do  not  speak  a  language  peculiar  to  themselves;  it  is  only 
their  pectoral  pronunciation  which  produces  that  apparent 
dialect.  The  great  national  songs  of  the  Kamchadales 
are  called  Bachia,  a  word  the  constant  repetition  of  which 
constitutes  the  whole  of  the  song.  The  melody  is  not 
devoid  of  expression,  although  Mr.  Langsdorf,  from  whom 

1  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  25S.  -  Ibid.,  p.  153. 

■^  Metz,  /.  c,  p.  30. 

(170) 


TEXT    AND    MUSIC.  17I 

I  borrow  this  remark,  could  not  discover  an}-  meaning  in 
it  whatever.^ 

Many  Papuans  in  New  Guinea  have  no  regularly  de- 
veloped language  at  all,  and  therefore  not  much  can  be 
expected  of  their  vocal  music,  at  least  not  of  the  text. 
These  texts  contain  words  that  never  occur  in  the  current 
language,  and  therefore  the  meaning  is  very  difficult  to  be 
found  out,  if  there  should  be  one  at  all.-  On  the  Tonga 
Islands  the  words  of  songs  are  in  the  Hamoa  language, 
which  the  natives  do  not  understand  (comp.  chap.  i.). 

In  x\ustralia  a  short  song  of  one  or  two  lines  easily 
spreads  from  tribe  to  tribe  until  the  last,  which  may  speak 
a  quite  different  language,  does  not  in  the  least  understand 
what  it  is  reall}'  singing.^''  The  songs  lose  a  good  deal 
of  their  popularity  if  in  use  for  a  long  time.  Thus  we 
Europeans  do  not  seem  to  be  the  onl\-  ones  who  get  blunt 
in  musical  matters.  The  Narrin^-eri  tribes  are  skilful  in 
the  utterance  of  emotions  by  sounds.  They  will  admire 
a  "foreign"  corrobberree  simph'  for  the  sound  of  it,  not 
understanding  a  word  of  the  meaning.  They  may  not  be 
able  to  define  the  feelings  which  the  corrobberree  expresses, 
but  }-et  they  will  learn  it  with  great  appreciation  if  it  seems 
to  express  something  which  their  own  composition  does 
not."^  The  Port  Lincoln  tribes  have  a  variety  of  songs,  all 
consisting  of  onl}-  two  or  three  verses  each.  If  the  proper 
metre  or  number  of  cadences  be  but  observed,  they  care 
little  or  nothing  for  the  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  song, 
which  they  generally  do  not  understand. ° 

Among  the  Indians  of  N.  America  meaningless  \N'ords  are 
especiall}-  in  use.  Of  course  this  is  not  alike  with  all  the 
tribes,  but  in  tr}'ing  to  give  a  general  description  of  their 
songs  we  ma}-  combine  the  statements  of  the  numerous 
writers  on  this  subject  in  the  following  sketch  :  Dances  and 

^  Langsdorf,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  303.  -  Schelling,  /.  c,  p.  81. 

^  Lumholtz,  /.  c,  pp.  156,  238;  Oldfield,  /.  c,  pp.  256-258. 
*  Taplin,  in  Wood,  /.  c,  p.  143.  -'Ibid. 


172  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

songs  seem  merely  a  succession  of  sounds  and  motions 
without  any  fixed  system.  Pounding  on  rude  drums  of 
hide  accompanies  the  songs,  which  are  sung  luithoiit  icoi'ds, 
and  in  which  some  travellers  pretend  to  have  detected 
some  savage  melody.^  In  singing  some  tribes  use  the 
sounds  "hi,  ah,"  no  intelligible  words  being  uttered.^ 
They  commence  in  a  low  tone  and  gradually  swell  to  a 
full,  round,  and  beautifully  modulated  chorus.^  Among 
other  tribes  the  songs  are  monotonous  chants,*  extending 
over  but  few  notes,  varied  by  occasional  howls  and  whoops 
in  some  of  the  more  spirited  melodies.^  Choruses  are 
alwa\-s  executed  with  great  exactness  in  spite  of  the  large 
number  of  singers. •"  The  words  are  often  borrowed  from 
other  tribes  without  being  understood  ;  ^  the  songs  them- 
selves are  "not  deficient  in  harmony,"^  while  they  have 
no  melody.'*  Chinook  songs  (Chinook  proper  is  spoken  on 
the  Lower  Columbia  River)  have  a  text  which  the  natives 
mostly  do  not  understand. ^"^  The  meaning  of  the  serpent 
song  of  the  Passamaquoddy  Indians  is  unknown,  as  the 
words  belong  to  an  obsolete  or  to  a  secret  language.^^  The 
Sioux  Indians  commenced  their  singing  in  a  low  tone, 
gradually  raising  it  for  a  few  minutes,  then  closing  it 
suddenly  with  a  shrill  yell ;  after  a  slight  interruption  they 
recommenced  the  same  air,  which  they  sang  without  any 
variation  for  nearly  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  This  was 
accompanied  by  a  few  unmeaning  words. ^"^ 

Side  by  side  with  these  meaningless  songs  there  are 
also  solo  songs  with  a  definite  subject,  and  these  some- 
times occur  among  the  natives  of  one  and  the  same  tribe. 

1  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  281.  -  Parker,  Explor.  Tour.,  p.  241. 

•*  Townsend,  Narr.,  p.  106.  ■*  Sproat,  Scous,  p.  64. 

'  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  201.  ^  Cook,  Voy.  to  Pac,  ii.  p.  310. 

^  Jewitt,  Nnr.,  p.  87  ;  text  of  a  war-song,  /.  c,  p.  97. 

^  Ibid.  ^  C.  Grant,  /.  c,  p.  306. 

1"  Boas,  Chinook  Songs,  I.  c,  p.  244. 

"  Fevvkes,  /.  c,  p.  263  (mus.  example). 

12  Keating,  /.  c,  i.  p.  438. 


TEXT    AND    MUSIC.  I73 

Many  travellers,  Catlin  in  particular,  have  been 
puzzled  by  the  occurrence  of  the  word  "  Hallelujah  "  in 
Indian  songs,  and  made  use  of  it  as  one  of  the  reasons  for 
the  Indians  originating  from  the  ten  lost  tribes  of  Israel 
(comp.  p.  51).  Mr.  de  Monts,  who  accurately  observed  the 
text,  says  about  it :  At  first  they  sang  "  halvet  ho  ho  he," 
then  the  general  outer}'  followed  "  E,"  then  again  "  Egrigna 
han  he  hu,"  and  at  last  the  ominous  "  Tameia  allelujah 
tameia  don  veni  han  han  he  he".  From  this  Mr.  de 
Monts  draws  the  conclusion — unintelligible  to  me— that 
this  song  was  sung  in  praise  of  the  devil. ^  Mr.  Adair  also 
heard  the  word,  and  adds  that  the  Indians  never  repeat  at 
any  other  time  the  words  they  sing  in  their  religious 
dances.  He  concludes,  therefore,  that  the  meaning  of 
this  divine  hymn  must  have  got  lost."  The  most  probable 
suggestion,  however,  is  that  of  Mr.  T3'lor,  who  calls  our 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  word  is  combined  of  such 
syllables  as  frequently  occur  in  so  many  similar  words  of 
the  most  different  nations  of  the  globe.'^ 

The  Macusi  Indians  in  Guiana  amuse  themselves  for 
hours  with  singing  a  monotonous  song,  whose  words,  hai-a, 
hai-a,  have  no  further  significance.^ 

Speaking  of  the  Iroquois  Mr.  Morgan  says  that  their 
war-songs  are  in  a  dead  language,  or,  at  all  events,  they 
are  unable  to  interpret  them.  "  They  are  in  regular 
verses  or  measured  sentences,  and  are  learned  by  them 
with  the  dance  originally."  ^  Mr.  Baker,  too,  observed  the 
meaninglessness  of  the  Indian  songs,  making  the  additional 
remark  that  primitive  man  could  only  be  satisfied  with 
such  simple  utterances  as  long  as  his  mind  was  too  little 
developed."  I  think,  however,  this  fact  must  have  a 
deeper  psychological  source,  for  even  we  sing  our  meaning- 


1  Monts,  /.  c,  chap.  vi.  p.  861.  -Adair,  /.  c,  p.  97. 

■*  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult.,  2nd  edit.,  i.  p.  i8g.        ^  Schomburgk,  /.  c,  p.  274. 

•'  Morgan,  I.  c,  p.  2  ft".  ''  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  7. 


174  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

less  tra  la  la,  etc.,  without  being  in  the  least  disturbed   by 
its  having  no  signification  whatever. 

For  the  present  the  above  facts  may  serve  to  prove  the 
following  conclusions  : — 

1.  In  primitive  times  vocal  music  is  not  at  all  a  union 
of  poetry  and  music.  We  find,  on  the  contrary,  vocal 
music  among  tribes  which  owing  to  the  insufficient  develop- 
ment of  language  cannot  possibly  have  any  kind  of  poetry. 
Thus  the  position  of  vocal  music  is  quite  independent  of 
any  other  art. 

2.  It  is  impossible  that  in  these  cases  music  arose  as 
a  direct  imitation  of  the  natural  accent  ready  made  in 
speech,  because  these  te.xts  are  neither  themselves  a 
language,  nor  could  the  melody  alone  have  been  taken 
from  a  developed  language,  for  in  such  a  case  the  words 
would  have  been  borrowed  together  with  the  music. 
Entirely  meaningless  words  simply  serve  to  facilitate  the 
vocalisation. 

Another  striking  feature  of  these  savage  songs  is  the 
liberty  with  which  the  composer  treats  the  grammatical 
structure  of  the  sentence  and  the  logical  order  of  words. 
Thus  in  most  of  the  Andamanese  songs  the  words  in  their 
poetic  form  are  so  mutilated  to  suit  the  metre  as  to  be 
scarcelv  recognisable  ;  indeed,  it  not  unfrequently  happens 
that  the  composer  of  a  new  song  has  to  explain  its  meaning 
in  the  ordinary  vernacular  to  his  chorus  as  well  as  to  the 
audience  in  general.^  I  am  afraid  that  modern  composers, 
too,  would  do  well  to  take  the  same  trouble  in  explaining 
their  songs  to  the  public  as  the  Andamanese  composer,  for 
thev  treat  the  words  with  the  same  carelessness.  It  may 
be  allowed  to  ask,  how  in  such  cases  the  composer  can 
have  followed  the  natural  modulation  of  the  words,  how 
from  this  can  music  have  arisen  if  the  composer  had  to 
change  the  words,  their  form,  sense,  etc.,  in  order  to  adapt 

1  E.  H.  Man,  /.  c,  p.  iig  ;  Portman,  /.  c,  pp.  185,  193. 


TEXT    AND    MUSIC.  I75 

them  to  his  music  ?  Evidently  the  musical  modulation 
(the  tune)  was  an  accomplished  fact  in  this  case,  originat- 
ing elsewhere,  before  the  composition  of  the  poem  began. 

In  Australia  many  of  the  natives  cannot  e\'en  give  an 
interpretation  of  the  songs  of  their  own  districts — not  to 
say  of  others — and  most  of  the  explanations  they  give  are 
very  imperfect,  as  "the  measures  or  quantities  of  the 
syllables  appear  to  be  more  attended  to  than  the  sense  ".^ 
If  negroes  sing  they  keep  strict  time  and  do  not  allow 
themseh'es  to  be  hindered  by  any  obstacle  in  the  use  of 
words.  The  most  obstinate  Scripture  texts  and  well-known 
passages  in  hymns  must  be  adapted  to  any  melody.-  Now, 
even  in  Bach's,  Handel's,  Haydn's,  and  Mozart's  time  the 
Bible  text  had  to  undergo  similar  treatment. 

As  a  rule  savages  do  not  understand  how  to  invent  and 
to  compose  a  long  connected  story  or  a  complete  poem  ; 
they  simply  take  up  any  current  event,  put  it  into  two  or 
three  strophes  and  repeat  this  several  times.  Mr.  Lum- 
holtz  relates  this  of  the  natives  on  Herbert  River  in 
Australia,^  and  it  is  elucidated  by  many  examples  of 
Gre3''s.'*  Europeans,  and  their  whole  behaviour  and 
appearance,  are  frequently  the  subject  of  these  songs. 
They  are  usually  performed  in  the  form  of  question  and 
answer,  the  chorus  being  a  mere  repetition  of  one  or  two 
words.''  Music  in  Samoa  was  a  monotonous  chant  of  a 
line  or  two  repeated  over  and  over  again,  with  no  variety 
beyond  two  or  three  notes.  "  They  sought  variety  rather 
in  time.  The  singers  began  slow  and  gradually  increased 
until,  at  the  end  of  ten  or  twenty  minutes,  they  were  full 
of  excitement,  the  perspiration  streaming  down,  and  their 
tongues  galloping  over  the  rhyme  at  breathless  speed."  '' 
Speaking  of  the  Ainu,   Mr.   Siebold   says  he  heard   them 

1  Eyre,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  229  ;  Catlin,  i.  p.  216;  Dieffenbach,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  57. 
^  Allen,  War,  etc.,  /.  c,  p.  iv.  ■'  Lumholtz,  /.  c,  pp.  156,  238. 

"*  Grey,  Austr.,  p.  310.  5  Eyre,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  239-240. 

^  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  125  ;  Poly.,  p.  211. 


176  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

singing  in  a  hoarse  voice  while  they  were  paddhng,  or  at 
night  on  horseback.  Their  songs  were  of  a  plaintive 
character,  very  short,  and  repeated  several  times.^  Mr. 
Lesseps  tells  us  of  a  Kamchadales  song  whose  words 
were  :  "  Daria  (a  Russian  female  name)  sings  and  dances 
still".  The  eight  bars  of  which  it  consisted  were  repeated 
almost  without  ceasing.-  Mr.  Burckhart  heard  a  national 
song  of  the  Arabian  women  whose  first  line  was  repeated  five 
or  six  times  by  the  leading  chorus  and  then  echoed  by  the 
other  parties.  In  the  same  manner  the  second  line  was 
sung ;  but  the  third,  which  always  contained  the  name  of 
some  distinguished  warrior,  was  repeated  as  often  as  fifty 
times.  The  ladies,  however,  pronounced  that  name  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  render  it  difficult  for  the  men,  who 
listened,  to  know  who  was  the  happy  mortal.^  The  most 
of  the  Kafirs'  songs  consist  of  only  a  few  words  which  they 
repeat  over  and  over  again,  with  such  musical  variation 
as  their  national  task  or  individual  fancy  may  dictate.* 
The  songs  in  Kamerun  are  but  a  constant  repetition  of 
the  same  sentence,  provided  they  have  an  actual  text  with 
some  meaning  in  it.^  Mr.  Poole  heard  on  Queen  Charlotte 
Islands  (the  northern  of  the  two  groups  in  the  Pacific 
Ocean)  two  favourite  songs,  of  which  the  first — kept  within 
the  compass  of  five  tones — was  repeated  four  times  and 
ended  in  a  chorus  ;  the  second  was  a  mere  repetition  of  the 
tone  "  B,"  while  the  words  of  both  had  no  meaning.^ 

If  we  ask  for  the  reasons  of  these  constant  repetitions 
in  primitive  poetry  and  music,  we  shall  have  to  answer 
that  primitive  man  lacks  the  power  of  elaborating  the 
outcome  of  his  fancy  to  a  complete  work  of  art.  The 
circle  of  ideas  he  has  is  too  limited  in  comparison  with 


1  Siebold,  /.  c,  p.  48. 

-  Lesseps,  /.  c,  i.  p.  104.     Daria  is  also  the  usual  Central  Asian  term  for 
a  river. 

■'  Burckhart,  /.  c,  p.  47.  •*  Grout,  /.  c,  p.  193,  with  examples. 

5  Buchner,  Kamer.,  p.  29.  "  F.  Poole,  /.  c,  p.  322. 


TEXT    AND    MUSIC.  177 

the  abundance  of  feelings.  The  child  is  in  precisely  the 
same  position ;  as  soon  as  it  produces  a  rhyme  on  the  spur 
of  the  moment,  it  begins  to  repeat  it  several  times ;  by  this 
it  works  itself  up  to  the  necessary  mood  or  disposition  of 
mind  which  its  limited  intelligence  cannot  supply  with 
sufficient  variety  of  ideas.  After  all,  every  lyric  poet  gives 
us  one  idea  only,  but  always  repeating  it  in  other  words 
and  new  combinations. 

Still,  even  savages  attain  the  higher  forms  of  poetry  at 
times,  and  this  quite  apart  from  dramatic  representations, 
which  are  to  them,  from  the  very  beginning,  the  natural 
example  of  a  complete  work  of  art.  Thus  some  songs 
of  the  Australians  have  texts  of  a  comparatively  advanced 
kind,  and  although  monotonous  repetitions  are  not  at  all 
avoided,  there  is  still  a  definite  idea  clearly  expressed.-^ 
Topinard  says  of  these  songs  :  "  Les  paroles  en  roulent 
sur  des  sentiments  doux,  plus  souvent  sur  des  idees  de 
vengeance  et  de  represailles,  et  se  transmettent  de  pere  en 
fils  et  de  tribus  en  tribus  verbalement  ".'^  Many  of  the 
original  Maori  songs,  too,  contain  very  beautiful  ideas  ; 
the  metre  is  difficult  to  describe,  there  being  no  regular 
measure  of  verse ;  the  chief  object  is  to  make  the  lines  suit 
their  tunes.  They  have  songs  on  every  subject,  love,  war, 
as  well  as  incantations,  laments,  traditions,^  nursery  and 
boat  songs."*  Night  is  the  favourite  time  for  the  Maori 
orator  to  make  speeches  ;  he  waits  until  all  is  still  in  the 
"  pa,"  and  then  stepping  forth  from  his  house  and  march- 
ing in  front  of  it  sings  in  a  loud,  shrill  tone  some  old  song 
which  bears  on  the  subject  he  is  going  to  speak  upon. 
His  speeches  are  generally  answered  by  another,  and  thus 
the  discussion  is  kept  up  during  the  best  part  of  the  night.^ 

Among  the  Hottentots  the  mother  praises  her  child  in 

1  The  best  collection  of  Australian  songs  (words)  by  Grey,  Aiistr.,  p. 
310  scq. 

2  Topinard,  L'Anstr.,  p.  72.  ^  R.  Taylor,  I.  c,  p.  306. 
■»  Dieffenbach,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  27.                ^  R.  Taylor,  /.  c,  p.  343. 

12 


lyS  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

a  song,  touching  and  kissing  all  the  parts  she  is  going  to 
sing  about. ^  Bushmen,  Hottentots,  and  Waganda  have 
animal  fables  that  betray  no  little  talent  for  close  observa- 
tion.^ Mr.  Gardiner  mentions  some  hunting-  and  war-songs 
of  the  Kafirs.  Every  song,  he  says,  has  a  different  air ; 
a  few  are  humorous  and  colloquial,  the  women  being 
asked  questions  to  which  they  respond.  Others  are 
danced  by  the  men  and  directed  by  the  king  himself, 
while  the  women  in  the  centre  raise  their  voices  to  the 
highest  pitch.  At  the  end  of  a  song  the  king's  heralds 
run  along  the  lines  always  shouting  O,  O,  0,  to  indicate 
its  conclusion.^  So  simple,  not  to  say  vulgar,  are  the 
words  to  the  songs  of  many  tribes  that  one  might  doubt 
how  from  so  primitive  a  beginning  our  highest  poetical 
ideals  could  have  arisen.  And  yet  they  did  so  arise, 
although  even  so  natural  a  subject  as  love  seems  to  in- 
dicate a  higher  state  of  progress  in  poetry.  At  all  events 
we  have  not  found  sufficient  examples  for  Mr.  Engel's 
assertion  "■  that  love-songs  should  be  found  all  over  the 
world  is  only  what  might  be  expected  ".*  For,  contrary  to 
all  expectations,  we  find  some  tribes  which  do  not  know  this 
kind  of  poetry;  those  on  the  Lower  Congo  have  it,  but  they 
sing  equally  frequently  on  war,  hunting,  and  palm-wine.^ 
The  songs  of  the  Hassanyeh  tribes  on  the  White  Nile  are 
sung  in  praise  of  a  favourite  member  of  the  tribe,  or  they 
are  narrations  of  a  love  adventure,  or  they  praise  one  of 
the  present  European  visitors.*^  The  Haussa  have  songs 
with  beautiful  texts,  recited  "  extempore"  by  a  singer,  the 
burden  being  sung  by  the  chorus.^  When  the  Joruba  of 
the  Sudan  are  beaten  in  battle  by  the  Haussa,  the}-  at  once 
make  a  poem  in  which  they^sing  of  their  own  power,  the 
dread   of  the   enemy,   and  their  victory,  while   in   reality 

1  Hahn,  /.  c,  p.  2  ;  Ploss,  Das  Kind,  ii.  p.  76. 

-  Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  466.  -'A.  Gardiner,  /.  c,  p.  59. 

•*  Engel,  A^r;^  Miis.,  p.  304.  •>  Tuckey,  I.  c,  p.  373. 

^Petherick,  /.  c,  p.  139.  ■"  Lander,  Rcc.  Clapp.,  i.  p.  296. 


TEXT    AI^D    MUSIC.  179 

the  Haussa  were  the  victors.^  The  Badagrians  sing  during 
the  human  sacrifices.  The  victim  is  given  a  bottle  of  rum, 
and  while  he  drinks  it  he  is  slain  from  behind.  Then  his 
heart  is  cut  out  of  the  body,  and  while  still  warm  and 
bleeding  is  presented  to  the  king,  who,  as  well  as  his  chief 
wives,  bite  into  it.  Then  it  is  carried  about  in  the  village 
and  the  following  song  sung  by  the  people  : — 

As  we  gaze  upon  the  slain 
Courage  mounts  in  every  vein  : 
Hearts  of  iron,  breasts  of  steel, 
Bold  Badagrians  reveal.'^ 

The  songs  of  the  Murzuk  (Sahara),  played  by  women 
on  the  erbab,  or  by  young  Arabs,  are  all  pretty  and  of 
plaintive  character  ;  the  language  of  the  Sudanese,  on  the 
whole,  sounds  very  musical,  while  the  words  are  long 
connected  stories.^ 

Among  the  Sioux  Indians  of  North  America  lullabies 
are  in  use.^  On  Nukahiva  Mr.  Langsdorf  heard  a  typical 
representation  of  a  warlike  scene.  One  of  the  people  saw 
at  night  a  fire  upon  an  enemy's  island  and  asked.  Where 
is  the  fire  ?  The  others  answered.  Upon  Tanata.  This 
excited  the  idea  of  battle  and  revenge  on  one  hand,  and  of 
pity  and  melancholy  on  the  other,  ending  with  the  thought 
of  the  time  they  would  be  able  to  feed  on  human  flesh.^ 
On  Samoa,  too,  some  songs  have  the  form  of  question  and 
answer  sung  by  two  parties  ;  and  thus  they  go  on  singing 
as  they  walk  along  the  road,  or  paddle  the  canoe,  or  do 
any  other  piece  of  work.  These  songs  often  contain 
sarcastic  remarks,  and  in  passing  the  house  or  village  of 
parties  with  whom  they  are  displeased  they  strike  up  a 
chant    embodying   some   offensive  ideas,     "  Their  bitter, 

'  Lander,  Rcc.  Clapp.,  i.  pp.  289-290.  '-Ibid.,  ii.  pp.  260-263. 

^  Lyon,  /.  c,  p.  173. 

^Greenwood,  I.  c,  p.  17  ;  Ploss,  Das  Kind,  ii.  p.  76. 

•'  Langsdorf,  /.  c,  i.  p.  164  seq. 


l80  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

venomous  songs  lead  even  to  war."  ^  The  natives  on 
Tahiti  have  historical  ballads ;  the  children  are  early 
taught  the  "  ubus,"  songs  referring  to  the  legends  or 
achievements  of  the  gods.  Their  traditionary  ballads  are 
a  kind  of  standard  or  classical  authority,  to  which  they 
refer  for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  disputed  fact  in 
their  history.^  Speaking  of  the  negritos  on  Philippine 
Islands  Mr.  Schadenberg  mentions  a  song  whose  words 
were  :  "  We  are  poor  men,  and  lead  a  miserable  life  ".^  It 
is  very  seldom  that  savages  are  aware  of  the  miserable 
condition  they  are  living  in. 

The  songs  of  the  Kamchadales  do  not  celebrate  the 
death  of  heroic  ancestors,  nor  the  adventures  of  hunt  and 
war  ;  they  are  ballads  of  a  melancholic,  fanciful  character, 
apparently  inspired  by  sadness,  love,  and  domestic  feelings. 
The  music  has  a  wild,  strange  sound,  reminding  us  of  woe 
and  sorrow,  and  as  if  it  would  contain  the  memor}-  of  a 
happy  past  that  has  gone  by  for  ever.'*  I  do  not  know 
whether  Mr.  Kennan,  who  made  this  remark,  did  not  put 
more  feeling  into  the  music  than  it  actually  contained, 
but  he  expressly  assures  us  that  the  song  "  Penjinski,"  as 
sung  by  the  inhabitants  of  Lesnoi,  more  particularly  ex- 
pressed the  above  character.  Their  dance  melodies,  how- 
ever, are  said  to  be  very  jolly,  containing  some  "  staccato  " 
passages,  which  are  repeated  many  times  without  any 
variety. 

The  union  of  words  and  music  assumes  at  times  a 
quite  different  form,  resembling  our  "recitative  ".  Upon 
the  fact  that  this  recitative  does  not  occur  in  the  most 
primitive  state  of  culture  I  have  to  lay  special  emphasis, 
if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  it  requires  a  comparatively 
developed  language.  When  it  occurs,  however,  the  more 
primitive  form  of  choral  dances  is  to  be  found  at  the  same 


^  Turner,  Polyn.,  p.  345.  ^  Ellis,  Pol.  Res.,  i.  p.  286. 

'^ Schadenberg,  /.  c,  p.  145.  ^Kennan,  /.  c,  p.  161. 


TEXT    AND    MUSIC,  l8l 

time.  These  two  distinct  classes  of  songs,  the  choral 
dance  song  and  the  solo  song  (recitative),  we  have  been 
able  to  follow  throughout  the  book.  Among  some  tribes 
the  recitative  form  is  in  itself  impossible  :  "  The  Barea 
and  Bazena  (in  the  Kunama  country,  Abyssinia),  who 
possess  a  large  number  of  wise  laws,  have  many  songs, 
and  more  melodies  than  all  their  neighbours.  Their  night 
song,  '  Goila,'  is  renowned  far  and  wide.  The  recitative 
which  is  peculiar  to  the  Tigre  and  Tobedauie  is  entirely 
unfit  for  the  character  of  the  language."  ^  An  important 
statement  as  to  the  "  recitative  "  is  also  made  by  Mr. 
Portman  in  his  treatise  on  Andamanese  music.  "  The 
singing  of  the  Andamanese  is  in  regular  duple  time.  This 
is  more  particularly  marked  in  the  choruses,  when  you 
have  the  rhythmical  accompaniment.  The  continuance 
of  one  note,  or  of  a  sequence  of  notes  a  little  distance 
apart,  which  is  an  attribute  of  Oriental  music,  often  leads 
persons  who  do  not  know  the  meaning  of  the  word  to  call 
Andamanese  solos  '  recitative,'  which  term,  as  meaning 
musical  declamation,  docs  not  in  the  least  apply.''  Examples 
like  this  form  one  of  the  strongest  arguments  against  Mr. 
Spencer's  speech-theory,  according  to  which  music  arose 
from  emotional  speech,  and  the  recitative  was  its  most 
primitive  form.  As  to  the  subjects  of  the  Andamanese 
songs,  Mr.  Portman  says  they  had  no  religious,  no  nursery, 
and  no  love-songs,  the  principal  subject  being  pig  hunting, 
lish  shooting,  turtle  and  dugong  spearing,  fighting,  making 
boats,  bows,  etc.  "  The  music,  rhythm,  accent,  and  in- 
tonation, is  no  clue  to  the  sense  of  the  song,  and  a  person 
not  knowing  the  language  would  be  ignorant  as  to  whether 
a  fight,  hunt,  or  the  making  of  a  boat  was  being  described."^ 
Thomson    explicitly    mentions    the    recitative.        His 

^  Munzinger,  /.  c,  p.  535  ;  Tigre  is  one  of  the  chief  languages  of  Abys- 
sinia, consequently  highly  developed  (ibid.,  p.  539) ;  so  also  is  the  Bedouin 
language  Tobedauie  (ibid.,  p.  341). 

-  Portman,  /.  c',  p.  184. 


l82  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Zanzibar  porters  were  distinguished  by  a  wonderful  "  elas- 
ticit}^  of  spirits  "  ;  they  danced,  sang,  and  beat  time  with 
their  hands,  and  they  also  performed  recitatives  ac- 
companied by  cheer}'  shouts.^  Guessfeldt  describes  a 
festival  at  Nkondo  which  consisted  of  dances,  rhythmic 
songs,  and  beating  of  drums.  During  this  an  individual 
arose  and  improvised  a  few  lines,  which  the  chorus 
answered.-  The  social  and  domestic  songs  of  the  Joruba 
and  Borghus  are  recitatives  and  the  exact  opposite  of  their 
public  and  national  songs.-^  At  Katafungi  (West  Africa) 
Lander  heard  the  natives  sing:  "  It  appeared  to  be  some- 
thing comical,  in  the  form  of  a  recitati\-e,  to  ^^•hich  they 
kept  time  by  clapping  their  hands  "'.  ■* 

The  Malays  of  Sumatra  ("  the  Italians  of  the  Orient  ") 
amuse  themselves  during  their  leisure  hours  with  songs 
which  are  a  sort  of  proverb,  a  description  of  events  in  their 
daily  life.  Many  of  these  are  carefully  practised  ;  they  are 
recitatives  and  are  produced  at  festivals,  while  others  are 
extemporised.^  Such  extemporisations  by  individual 
singers  are  repeated  during  pauses  in  a  regular  choral 
song,  with  which,  indeed,  they  alternate  ;  they  are  there- 
fore neither  the  onl}-  kind  of  music  they  possess  nor  the 
most  primitive,  but  are  merely  a  certain  connection 
between  music  and  a  more  coherent  and  developed  speech 
and  poetry.  This  difference  in  the  two  forms  of  music 
found  among  so  many  savage  tribes  is  clearly  preserved 
in  later  periods  of  culture  where  the  kind  of  recitative,  as 
is  usual  during  religious  service,  is  taken  by  so  many 
writers  for  the  most  primitive  form  of  music.  This  is 
quite  an  error.     Even  the  ancient  Armenians  recognise  a 

^  Thomson,  Ccntr.  Afr.  Lak.,  i.  p.  96. 

2  Guessfeldt,  Loaiigo,  p.  76.  Nkondo  Ndindshi  in  Mayombe,  West 
Africa. 

^  Lander,  Rec.  of  Clapp.,  i.  p.  ago. 

Ubid.,  p.  256. 

5  Marsden,  /.  c,  p.  197. 


TEXT    AND    MUSIC.  183 

difference  between  the  recitation  of  the  Psalms  and  the 
singing  of  them,  and  both  of  these  systems  were  in  use  in 
divine  service.^  Ibn  Khaldun,  an  Arabian  writer  in  the 
final  period  of  Arabian  rule  in  Spain  ("  the  Montesquieu 
of  the  Orient"),  says  that  the  Arabs  were  in  former  days 
well  acquainted  with  the  art  of  improvisation,  while  song 
and  music  generally  were  in  a  very  rude  state.  Later 
only,  when  they  learned  more  of  foreign  culture,  did  they 
designate  modulation  of  the  voice  "  Song,"  and  distinguish 
it  from  the  declamation  of  the  Koran  and  their  prayers, 
which  they  called  "Taghjir".-  I  would  here  remark 
that  they  read  the  Koran  in  a  sort  of  recitative,  and  that 
they  made  a  difference  between  this  and  real  song,  which 
at  all  times  has  been  something  other  than  recitatival 
impro^■isation. 

It  sometimes  happens  that  in  speaking  the  excitement 
of  passion  leads  to  rising  modulations  of  the  voice.  An 
example  of  this  is  given  by  Martius.  "  When  the  Boto- 
cudo  longs  for  and  passionately  demands  anything  he 
raises  his  voice  to  a  monotonous  song.  It  is  as  though 
the  poverty  of  his  expression  would  be  retrieved  by  the 
increased  power  of  sound."  ^  Guessfeldt,  too,  says  : 
"  Negroes  are  excellent  orators  and  speak  for  hours 
together  without  tiring.  At  times  their  speech  becomes  a 
sort  of  singing  recitative,  in  which  sounds  of  a  plaintive 
melody  may  be  remarked,  and  in  which  those  around 
join."  -^  These  examples,  however,  demonstrate  but  the 
truth  of  what  they  themselves  say,  that  when  excited  we 
modulate  our  voices  more  under  certain  circumstances  ; 
but  not  until  music  has  arisen  from  other  sources  is  this 
modulation  of  speech  recognised  as  being  akin  to  musical 

1  Petermann,  /.  c,  p.  366  ;  Armenian  musical  annotation  (alphabet)  by 
Schroder,  /.  c,  p.  243  ;  mus  exampL,  ibid.,  pp.  370-371. 
^  Kiesewetter,  /.  c,  p.  10 
•^  Martius,  /.  c,  p.  330  note. 
^  Guessfeldt,  Loango,  p.  84. 


184  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

[  modulation,  and  transformed  into  melody  and  song.  That 
this  transformation  of  speech  into  song  is  no  proof  of  the 
j  origin  of  music  and  of  language  is  made  clear  by  the  fact 
I  that  there  are  equally  good  examples  to  the  contrary  in 
I  existence,  from  which,  however,  no  one  has  drawn  any 
i  definite  conclusion  as  to  the  origin  of  language  from  music. 
How  often  does  a  composer  sink  himself  deeply  into  the 
mood  which  governs  him,  until  he  at  length  finds  words 
which  enable  him  to  exactly  express  his  intention  !  (Beet- 
hoven's gth  symphony.)  Examples  in  musical  history  are 
both  so  numerous  and  so  generally  known  that  I  need  not 
give  any  here.  Moreover,  it  sometimes  happens  that  the 
singer,  too,  allows  the  melody  to  drop,  as  it  were,  in  order 
to  speak  a  certain  word  or  even  a  sentence,  because  the 
effect  points  to  a  definite  idea,  and  it  is  just  in  this  de- 
finiteness  that  the  acme  of  expression  lies.  The  one  is 
psychologically  as  correct  as  the  other,  for  all  depends  upon 
one's  object.  From  an  artistic  standpoint  one  can  say  that 
music  must  always  remain  music,  speech  remain  speech, 
but  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  ever}'-day  life,  ordinary  speech 
changes  to  musical  modulation  as  often  as  musical  modu- 
lation to  ordinary  speech.  In  the  Indian  drama,  which 
was  originally  sung,  song  has  later  on  been  replaced  by 
speech  ;  ^  there  we  have  an  example  of  song  changing  to  speech. 
A  kind  of  spoken  song — in  ordinary,  and  not  only  in  that  of 
passionate  conversation — was  much  more  common  in  pri- 
mitive culture  than  is  now  the  case.  Oddly  enough,  those 
people  among  whom  speech-song  was  most  common — the 
Indo-Chinese  (Japanese) — have  not  progressed  in  the 
development  of  music  ;  the  emotional  element  of  speech 
being  laid  in  subjection  by  the  intellectual.  Their  music 
is  for  them  nothing  but  a  trifle.  Thither  then  has  this  song- 
speech  led  them,  historically ,  and  in  fact  :  to  Scholasticism,  to 
a  surrogate  of  Science,  not  to  Art,  least  of  all  to  Music  in  our 
meaning  of  the  word. 

^  Lassen,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  504. 


TEXT    AND    MUSIC.  185 

Cadence  and  accent  are  characteristic  signs  of  the 
Chinese  tongue,  and  all  Indo-Chinese  races  have  embodied 
them  in  their  own  language.  That  of  the  Siamese  is  the 
richest  in  cadence,  that  of  the  Burmese  has  less,  while  the 
Cambodian  languages  and  the  spoken  tongues  of  the  Laos 
have  none  at  all.  In  the  native  Hokken  (Fo-kieen)  pro- 
nouncing dictionaries,  the  Chinese  characters  are  divided 
into  eight  classes  to  correspond  with  the  number  of  tones. 
In  Burma  or  Siam  mere  modulation  of  the  voice  may 
completely  alter  the  meaning  of  a  word.^  Japanese  am- 
bassadors used  to  sing  at  the  receptions  at  European 
courts."^  The  Dahomian  language,  called  Ffou  by  the 
people,  and  Lingoageral  by  the  Portuguese,  is,  like  the 
Popo,  one  of  the  poorest  and  least  developed  tongues  of  the 
great  and  rich  Joruban  family;  and  it  is  just  this  poor  tongue 
that,  like  the  Chinese,  largely  depends  upon  the  cadence : 
the  word  which  we  write  "  so  "  means  there  "  to-day," 
"to-morrow,"  "  a  horse,"  "  bring"  (imp.  verb  and  root), 
"thunder,"  "  a  stick,"  according  to  the  modulation  of  the 
voice.  One  and  the  same  word  "  do  "  has  a  dozen  different 
meanings.^  It  is  significant  that  the  importance  of  the 
cadence  in  more  developed  languages  is  lost.  Even  origin- 
ally the  connection  between  cadence  and  meaning  was  not 
intuitive,  in  the  sense  that  a  certain  inflection  "  belonged 
directly  and  of  itself  to  particular  emotions  "  ;  the  compre- 
hension of  it  rested  both  ontogenetically  and  ph3-logeneti- 
cally  on  experience  and  reciprocal  agreement.*  Mr. 
Foster  noticed  this  singing  in  speech  (without,  however, 
mentioning  if  it  influenced  the  meaning  of  the  word)  on  the 
islands  Amsterdam    and   Middleburgh,^  as  did  Wilkes  in 


1  Bastian,  On  the  Ind.-Chiii.  Alph.,  I.  c.  -  Billert,  /.  c. 

^  R.  F.  Burton,  Notes  on  Dalioin.,  p.  313. 

-*  On  the  importance  of  cadence  in  primitive  languages,  the  musicians 
especially  ought  to  compare  Mr.  Tylor's  most  valuable  researches  in  Prim. 
Cult.,  i.  p.  151. 

■^  Foster,  /.  c,  p.  425  ;  Pink.  Collect.,  vol.  xi.  p.  678. 


l86  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Tierra  del  Fuego.^  This,  however,  is  less  surprising  on 
solemn  occasions,  such  as,  for  instance,  the  announcement  of 
a  victor}-  in  a  wrestling  match."-  The  Fiji  islanders  explain 
by  a  humorous  legend  their  practice  of  tattooing  among 
men  instead  of  among  women,  as  in  Tonga.  The  messenger 
who  reported  the  custom  from  Tonga  got  it  by  heart  and 
repeated  it  in  his  singing  tone ;  but  on  the  journey  he  struck 
his  foot  against  a  stump,  and  in  consequence  sang  the 
message  exactly  reversed.^  May  we  then  conclude  that  in 
this  place  a  singing  tone  in  the  speech  was  usual  in  the 
case  of  ordinary  announcements  ?  The  Narrinyeri  tribes 
in  Australia  have,  in  the  place  of  "  yes,"  a  kind  of  guttural 
grunt,  and  the  same  sound  with  a  different  inflection  means 
"no".  In  addition,  they  have  many  unarticulated  tones 
which  take  the  place  of  our  interjections.  Thus  "  kai-hai  " 
is  an  expression  of  surprise  ;  the  women  say  "  kaw-kah- 
kah  "  when  the}'  greet  their  friends — it  sounds  "  like  an 
old  crow  ".■* 

Baker  has  shown  by  numerous  musical  examples  the 
existence  among  North  American  Indians  of  two  different 
forms  of  music  :  the  recitative,  and  the  rhythmic  choral 
song.  In  his  opinion  the  latter  is  the  older  form  of  the 
two  for  the  following  reasons  : 

I.  The  characteristic  feature  of  primitive  song  was 
the  collectiveness  of  amusement.  2.  We  find  an  un- 
broken line  beginning  with  simple  rhythmic  songs  up  to 
accomplished  strictly  measured  airs  (he  quotes  thirty-two 
examples  written  down  by  himself,  and  eleven  quoted 
by  other  writers).  3.  The  rhythmic  form  has  been 
mentioned  by  almost  every  writer  upon  the  subject  of 
North  American  Indians.  4.  Such  recitatives  have  a 
flow  of  words  and  a  clearness  of  expression  which  are 
both  incompatible  with  primitive  song.-'' 

1  Wilkes,  /.  c,  i.  p.  125.  -  Pink.  Collect.,  vol.  xi.  p.  C80. 

•^  Williams,  /.  c,  p.  138.  ^  Taplin,  in  Wood,  /.  c,  p.  143. 

^  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  47. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC. 


It  is  scarcely  possible  to  speak  of  the  beginning  of  music 
without  at  the  same  time  thinking  of  the  dances  with 
which  it  was  so  intimately  connected.  This  is,  moreover, 
no  accidental  connection  that  can  under  certain  circum- 
stances be  omitted  as  in  the  case  of  poetry  and  music ;  it 
is  more  than  a  mere  connection,  it  is  a  unified  organism 
which  later  led  to  an  independent  musical  branch,  so 
unified  that  it  is  neither  possible  to  treat  of  the  subject  of 
primitive  dance  without  primitive  music,  nor  to  make  it 
even  probable  by  means  of  ethnological  examples  that 
they  ever  were  separated.^  In  regard  to  this,  Richard 
Wagner  was  undoubtedly  on  the  right  track — as  he  always 
was  when  following  the  bent  of  his  genius — when  he 
traced  the  original  form  of  music  to  the  dance.  But  I 
believe  that  he  erred  in  his  further  investigations  of  this 
idea  in  placing  the  art  of  poetry  third  in  the  order  of 
original  art-forms  (he  even  suggested  the  spelling  "  Ticht- 
kunst "  instead  "  Dichtkunst "  for  the  sake  of  analogy 
with  "  Tanzkunst  "  and  "  Tonkunst  ").'-  Later  arisen,  and 
in  spite  of  emotional  influences  always  depending  upon 
our  intellect,  poetry  preserved  an  independent  position, 
which  afforded  all  sorts  of  connecting  links  but  admitted 
of  no  organic  unity.     So  in  primitive  culture  there  existed 

1  "  In  Africa  dancing  cannot  be  separated  from  singing,  just  as  it  is 
impossible  to  separate  the  colour  from  the  skin.  An  African  would  not  live 
for  a  week  without  this  amusement."     (Lander,  Rec.  of  Clapp.,  i.  p.  293.) 

-  R.  Wagner,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  122. 

(187) 


I5»  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

not  only  poetry  without  music  (which  in  the  case  of  the 
dance  would  be  quite  inconceivable)  but  also  vocal  music 
without  poetry,  without  even  words,  while  the  recitative 
and  "  speech-song,"  which  was  a  hybrid  of  comparatively 
late  date,  had  been  proved  to  be  incapable  of  further  de- 
velopment. It  was,  too,  only  later  that  vocal  music 
became  a  combination  of  two  different  arts,  while  dance 
music  is  and  remains  a  whole,  and  as  such  is  subject  to 
the  common  fate  of  all  development.  We  must  not  think 
of  "  dance  "  always  in  the  exclusively  modern  sense,  but 
in  the  sense  of  regular  ordered  movements,  not  rarely 
coupled  with  pantomime,  even  in  the  most  primitive  state. 
By  way  of  explaining  this  we  will  give  a  few  general 
ethnological  observations  on  the  subject  of  the  dance. 

Mr.  Corry  relates  that  in  Africa  dancing  takes  place 
every  night,  and  that  every  village  resounds  again  with 
song  and  music  after  sunset.  Villages  situated  a  league 
apart  often  sing  alternately  the  same  song  for  hours 
together,  and  the  youth  of  both  sexes  listen  to  the  far- 
reaching  sounds  with  rapt  attention  and  manifest 
pleasure.  On  every  occasion  of  joy  or  sadness  dancing 
is  indulged  in.  There  are  monotone  songs,  at  times 
tender  and  pleasing,  at  others  wild  and  stormy,  but  always 
accompanied  by  slow  movements.^  Mr.  Webster  describes 
the  Hottentot  dance  as  a  "ludicrous  shuffling,"  and  the 
music  of  the  gourah  as  being  like  "  Neil  Gow's  fiddle," 
which  "  made  the  Scottish  maidens  beat  with  their  heels  ".- 
A  few  dancers,  grasping  the  doorposts,  beat  time,  while 
others  lean  on  chairs  and  stamp  with  their  feet,  both  being 
an  expression  arising  from  the  necessity  for  regular  move- 
ments. When  the  Bechuana  wish  to  dance  they  arrange 
themselves  in  a  circle  ;  each  dancer  blows  his  reed-pipe 
at  any  interval  that  may  seem  most  agreeable  to  him. 
Around   the    dancers    is    an    outer   circle   of  women   and 

1  Corry,  /.  c,  p.  153.  -  Foster,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  275-276. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  iSg 

girls  who  follow  each  movement  and  beat  time  by  clapping 
their  hands. ^  This  same  desire  for  regular  rhythm  we 
find,  too,  among  the  Makalaka,  who  accompany  their 
dances  with  drums  and  songs,  the  performance  itself 
reminding  one  strongly  of  a  European  quadrille.'-  The 
Makololo  dance  with  so  much  excitement  and  wildness 
that  their  dance  resembles  a  scene  in  a  lunatic  asylum. 
They  frequently  asked  if  the  whites  also  dance,  and 
Livingstone  gave  them  such  an  account  as  did  not  leave 
them  to  form  a  very  high  opinion  of  Europeans.^  The 
natives  of  Obbo  began  their  dance  by  all  singing  together 
a  wild  but  pleasant-sounding  melody  in  chorus.  Time 
was  marked  by  a  big  drum,  and  all  the  small  drums 
entered  so  precisely  at  the  right  moment  that  the  effect 
was  that  of  a  single  instrument.*  The  Wanyamwezi  (East 
Africa)  accompany  their  wild  springs  and  foot-stamping — 
which  they  call  "a  dance" — with  songs  and  the  beating 
of  drums,  the  Sidis  with  hand-clapping,  foot-stamping, 
and  sing  in  strict  time  and  with  unmistakable  gratifica- 
tion.^ In  this  matter  the  Ovambo  are  more  easily  satisfied, 
for  their  dance  is  a  mere  procession.*"  The  dances  of  the 
Sudanese  soldiers  so  closely  resembled  the  can  can  of  the 
"Jardin  Mabille  "  as  to  make  Mr.  Long  suggest  that  the 
latter  may  have  originated  in  Africa.'^  The  Barabras  in 
Upper  Egypt  are  quite  artists  in  the  elaboration  of  new 
striking,  rhythmical  effects.  At  their  dances  they  simul- 
taneously beat  a  different  rhythm  with  their  hands  and  with 
their  feet.^  At  Katunga  (in  the  Joruba  country.  Western 
Sudan)  the  natives  make  such  extraordinary  jumps  into 
the  air  during  their  dances  that  one  might  almost  believe 
they    had    no    bones.^     At    Wowo    ninety   to    a    hundred 

1  Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  329.  '^  Mauch,  /.  c,  p.  43. 

"^Livingstone,  /.  c,  p.  225.  ■•  Baker,  Albert  Nyanza,  i.  p.  314. 

■'  Grant,  /.  c,  p.  66.  "  Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  356. 

"  Ch.  Long,  /.  c,  p.  71.  '^Villoteau,  /.  c,  p.  128. 

"  Lander,  Rcc.  of  Clcipp.,  i.  p.  115. 


igO  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

women  arranged  some  religious  processions  in  which  they 
marched  in  time  to  the  music  of  the  drums  and  fifes  and 
sang  with  their  shrill  voices.  They  went  in  pairs,  carrying 
boughs  which  they  waved  in  time ;  it  is  said  to  have  been 
a  grotesque  spectacle.^  Mr.  Moore  relates  that  the 
negresses  are  always  very  pleased  when  a  white  man 
will  dance  and  drink  with  them,  but  if  the  drink  is  mixed 
by  a  European  whom  they  do  not  know  they  will  always 
make  him  take  the  first  draught  in  fear  of  poison.-  The 
dances  on  the  Canary  Islands  are  in  some  respects  of 
the  greatest  importance  for  us.  The  original  population 
(Guanches)  were  the  only  savages  who  danced  "  deux  a 
deux  "  as  we  do  in  our  dances.^ 

From  the  above  facts  we  may  once  more  conclude  that 
all  the  dances  depend  upon  time,  and  this  is  quite  as  much 
a  psychological  as  a  physical  requirement  ;  the  psycho- 
logical need,  like  everything  psychical  in  man,  is  a  product 
of  social  character,  and  as  all  dances  are  of  a  social  nature 
these  compel  the  individual  to  introduce  the  necessary 
order  and  arrangement  for  a  number  of  onlookers  and 
participants.  The  physical  requirement  arises  from  the 
necessity  of  dissipating  our  surplus  energy  by  some  self- 
selected  activity.  Necessity  of  time  and  movement,  music 
and  dance,  are,  like  interior  and  exterior,  two  different 
sides  of  one  and  the  same  thing. 

Examples  from  primitive  people  of  all  continents  con- 
firm what  has  already  been  said.  In  a  rich  and  complete 
collection  of  x\ustralian  dances  Mr.  B.  Smyth  has  drawn 
attention  to  the  accord  of  the  regular  dances  with  the 
music*  The  most  interesting  ones  take  place  when  one 
tribe  invites  another.  "  It  is  surprising  to  see  the  perfect 
time  that  is  kept  in  this  way,  and  the  admirable  manner 

1  Lander,  Rec.  of  Clapp.,  ii.  p.  121.  ~  Astlcy  Coll.,  ii.  p.  280. 

^  Barker  and  Berthelot,  Hist.  Nat.  Can.,  vol.  i.  part  i.  p.  155 ; 
Berthelot.  Memoir,   p.  202. 

•*  B.  Smyth,  /.  c,  pp.  166-176. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  igi 

in  which  the  motions  of  the  dancers  accord  with  the 
music.  There  is  no  confusion,  irregularity,  or  mistake."^ 
When  some  gifted  individual  has  invented  a  new  dance  or 
song  a  grand  merry-making  is  resolved  on.  Friends  and 
enemies  are  alike  welcome,  and  all  animosity  is  buried 
during  the  festivities."  Primitive  art  thus  brings  about 
easily  what  no  other  power  can  do,  and  so  strikingly 
exemplilies  the  fact  that  art,  quite  unconsciously  and 
unintentionally,  is  the  noblest  and  most  effective  source 
of  moral  impulse. 

We  have  already  (in  chap,  i.)  spoken  of  the  great 
rhythmic  effect  of  the  Maori  war-dance.  It  looks  so 
terrible  that  the  peaceable  natives  of  Tahiti  who  witnessed 
it  on  board  ship  ran  away  in  terror.^ 

Cook  mentions  a  dance  in  Tongatabu  to  which  a  chorus 
of  forty  to  sixty  men  made  up  the  musical  accompani- 
ment, reciting  sentences  while  dancing,  and  with  such 
precision  as  to  give  the  impression  of  a  performance  of  a 
single  man.*  Cook  speaks  in  a  similar  strain  of  a  dance 
in  Hapai,  where  numerous  dancers  seemed  to  act  as  if 
they  were  one  huge  machine.^  On  the  Marquesas  Islands 
song  and  dance  were  accompanied  by  hand-clapping;*' 
here  too  it  was  remarked  that  time  was  most  strictly  kept. 
On  Hawaii  there  were  some  troops  of  singers  and  dancers 
who  performed  their  art  for  payment.''  Mr.  A.  B.  Meyer 
relates  of  the  dances  and  songs  of  the  negritos  in  the 
Philippines,  "that  they  are  confined  to  mere  jumping  in  a 
circle  round  a  girl  and  stamping  with  the  feet.  The  same 
meaningless  phrase  is  repeated  in  a  monotonous  manner 
in  the  same  way  as  is  usual  with  other  savage  tribes,  as, 
e.g.,  in  Celebes  and  in  the  Bay  of  Tomini."^ 

^  Eyre,  I.  c,  ii.  pp.  229-241.  -  Oldfield,  I.  c,  pp.  256-258. 

^  Beechey,  /.  c-.,  i.  p.  222. 

■'Cook,  Thtj'd  Voyage,  iii.  p.  295  ;  Pink.  Coll.,  xi.  pp.  678-679. 

^  Cook,  ibid.,  i.  p.  248 ;  Pink.  Coll.,  xi.  p.  667.     "  Meinicke,  /.  c.  p.  255. 

^  Ibid.,  ii.  p.  306.  •'*  A.  B.  Meyer,  Negritos,  p.  21. 


ig2  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

One  of  the  commonest  dances  on  the  CaroHne  Islands 
strongly  resembles  the  French  branle  de  Capucins,  and  it 
too  is  accompanied  by  a  monotonous  song ;  ^  the  melody 
quoted  by  Freycinet  is  more  French  than  native.  The 
inhabitants  of  Radak  perform  their  song-dance  in  the 
evening  while  sitting  in  a  circle  round  a  brightly  burning 
fire.  Great  delight  is  manifested  by  every  one,  and  all 
voices  unite  in  a  chorus.  Such  songs  resemble  those  of  the 
people  on  Owaihi,  but  are  ruder  and  more  distorted,  as 
it  were,  the  ever-increasing  sounds  of  the  song  eventually 
degenerating  into  a  howl.^  The  most  popular,  and  in  fact 
the  sole,  property  of  these  people  is  their  "boats  and 
drums,  w^hich  also  serve  as  playthings  for  their  children  ". 
When  the  natives  of  Batavia  perform  their  "  missari " 
dance  they  arrange  themselves  in  two  rows,  move  their 
bodies  from  right  to  left  while  swinging  their  arms  in 
circles  in  opposite  directions.  Then  they  sing  a  slow, 
plaintive  song  accompanied  by  a  number  of  gongs  of 
various  sizes.^  In  speaking  of  the  Papuan  dances  in  New 
Guinea,  Mr.  Rosenberg  says:  "  De  dans  beteekent  bitter 
weinig  en  heeft  veel  van  bokkesprongen,  waarbij  men  achteniit 
huppelt"}  Among  the  Dyaks  of  Borneo  Mr.  Bock  found 
dances  and  songs  performed  together  when  a  child  was 
born  ;  ^  their  sword  dance,  to  which  the  strictest  time 
was  kept,  was  also  accompanied  by  music.^  In  Ceylon 
Mr.  Davy  witnessed  a  dance  at  which  the  natives  clapped 
their  hands  as  they  jumped  and  nodded  their  heads, 
throwing  their  long  entangled  forelocks  from  behind  over 
their  faces.  This  strange  dance  was  accompanied  by  a 
rude  kind  of  song." 

1  Freycinet,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  121  ;  mus.  exampl.,  ii.  p.  398. 

-  Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  115  ;  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  explain  to  the  reader  how 
one  can  dance  while  sitting,  but  Chamisso  is  express  in  saying:  "  sitzender 
Liedertanz  ". 

•^  Bickmoore,  /.  c,  p.  190.  *  Rosenberg,  /.  c,  p.  93. 

5  Bock,  /.  c,  p.  78.  ^  Keppel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  63. 

''  Davy,  /.  c,  p.  118. 


DANXE    AND    MUSIC.  ig3 

In  describing  the  dances  of  the  South  Sea  Islanders  the 
Tahiti  niNth  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree  ma}',  perhaps,  be 
mentioned.  According  to  it,  Tiniran,  "  the  king  of  all 
fish,"  decoyed  all  the  fish  of  the  sea  to  him,  which  changed 
their  forms  into  a  partial  resemblance  to  human  beings 
and  gladly  united  in  their  dance  with  him,  who  was  him- 
self in  his  true  attribute  half  man  and  half  fish.  Koro, 
his  son,  secretly  listened  to  his  father's  invocation,  attracted 
the  fish,  danced  with  them,  and  then  taught  the  natives  of 
Mangaia  the  mysteries  of  dancing.^ 

The  hill  tribes  of  Assam  (India)  have  dances  that  are 
quite  typical  for  the  primitive  state  of  this  art.  The 
musicians  are  placed  in  the  midst  of  a  circle,  the  dancers 
leap  around  and  at  intervals  drink  a  sort  of  rice  beer. 
The  longer  the  dance  lasts  the  wilder  it  becomes,  until 
one  musician  after  another  drops  off  and  finally  sleeps 
the  sleep  of  the  intoxicated  until  daybreak.  -  The 
Kachenzes  (Tatars  in  Siberia,  governments  of  Tomsk 
and  Yeniseisk,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Abakan  River) 
have  dances  like  those  of  the  Kalmuks,  consisting  of 
simple  bodily  movements  kept  in  strict  time.^ 

The  dances  of  the  North  American  Indians  are  united 
with  songs  or  instrumental  music  of  the  simplest  kind. 
At  such  entertainments  the  Indians  of  the  Upper  Missouri 
assume  very  grave  faces  that  bear  such  a  decided  contrast 
to  their  rapid  movements  and  burlesque  appearance,  that 
a  stranger  is  unable  to  discover  by  what  sentiments  the 
dances  are  actuated.*  This  play  of  the  features  among 
Indians  has  almost  invariably  puzzled  Europeans,  and  has 
often  given  rise  to  the  idea  that  the  Indians  are  entirely 
without  feeling,  a  view  which  close  examination  has 
always  refuted.  Mr.  Charlroix  described  as  early  as  172 1 
the  war  and  fire  dance  of  the  Mississagas  at  Cataraqui : 


1  Wyatt,  /.  c,  p.  100.  -  Murray- Ansley,  /.  c,  p.  275. 

■^  Georgi,  /.  c,  p.  238.  ^  Perrin  du  Lac,  /.  c,  p.  75. 

13 


194  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

The  performance  lasted  all  night  long  by  the  light  of  the 
lire  and  the  accompaniment  of  drums  and  the  chichikone. 
When  the  fire  was  put  out  one  of  the  dancers  danced  with 
a  coal  of  fire  in  his  mouth,  an  effect  only  lately  introduced 
into  modern  ballet  dances  b}'  the  aid  of  electric  light.  At 
present,  Mr.  Chamberlain  says,  these  Indians  have  for- 
gotten all  about  their  dances,  and  their  talent  for  singing 
has  been  directed  to  the  church,  while  a  short  time  ago 
the  Salvation  Army  "  charmed  away  some  of  the  Indians 
into  their  ranks  ".^  The  Indian  dances  in  New  California 
are  wild  and  different  in  every  tribe.  The  song  which  is 
sung  or  whistled  during  the  dance  is  for  the  most  part 
without  words.  The  natives  are  fond  of  gambling  with 
sticks,  the  number  of  which  is  to  be  guessed  ("odd  or 
even  ").- 

While  leaving  for  another  part  of  this  chapter  the  task 
of  giving  the  characteristics  of  some  peculiar  Indian 
dances,  I  will  continue  to  describe  their  general  character 
by  adding  a  few  examples  from  Central  and  South  America. 
The  dance  of  the  Klarheywey  (Zunian,  South  Mexico) 
consists  of  two  parts,  distinguished  by  different  songs 
and  different  movements.  Both  parts  are  danced  to  vocal 
music,  which  is  in  the  first  part  accompanied  by  a  drum, 
in  the  second  by  a  number  of  horns. ^  The  Iroquois  had 
thirty-two  different  dances,  twenty-six  of  which  were 
entirely  original,  while  only  twenty-one  are  still  in  use.* 
They  were  all  accompanied  with  music,  song  and  dance 
alternating.  During  a  war-dance  a  war-whoop  was  given 
by  the  leader  and  answered  by  the  entire  company.  It  was 
a  prolonged  sound  upon  a  high  note,  with  a  decadence  near 
the  end,  followed  by  an  abrupt  explosive  conclusion,  in 
which  the  voice  was  raised  again  to  the  original  pitch.^ 
The  frequency  with  which  the  Iroquois  danced  in  a  circle 

^  Chamberlain,  /.  c,  p.  159.  -  Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  20. 

■^  Fewkes,  Sum.  Ceiii.,  p.  47.  ■*  Morgan,  /.  c,,  p.  291. 

^  Ibid.,  p.  272. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  ig5 

caused  Baker  to  think  it  was  meant  to  represent  the 
course  of  the  sun,  which  the  Indians  worship  ;  ^  but  we 
have  seen  this  circular  dance  among  so  many  tribes  and 
on  all  continents  where  the  sun  is  not  worshipped,  that 
this  conclusion  does  not  necessarily  follow.  It  appears 
to  me  rather  that  the  circular  form  is  adopted  (if  inten- 
tionally adopted  at  all)  for  the  same  reason  that  we  have 
adopted  it  in  our  games  :  to  keep  the  company  together, 
and  to  concentrate  in  an  equal  degree  the  interest  of  all 
participants  on  the  object  of  the  play.  Moreover,  many 
kinds  of  birds  dance  thus  in  circles  '^  (e.g.,  Tetrao  phasian- 
elliis)  without  worshipping  the  sun. 

In  ancient  Mexico  the  dances  were  accompanied  by 
songs  and  instruments ;  both  began  with  deep  notes 
which  constantly  rose  in  pitch  and  were  accelerated  as 
the  pleasure  increased.^ 

At  Huacho  (a  town  in  Peru)  the  Indians  dance  in  the 
street  in  time  to  the  music  of  a  pipe  and  tabor,  to  which 
time  is  given  by  small  bells  tied  to  the  legs.  They 
become  so  passionately  absorbed  in  their  dance' that  when 
a  second  troop  of  dancers  comes  up  neither  will  give  way 
to  the  other  to  pass  until  cudgels  are  brought  into  requi- 
sition.* During  an  Indian  festival  on  the  Rio  Chico  (in 
Patagonia)  the  men  and  women  sat  down  on  the  grass  at 
different  spots,  a  few  old  hags  singing  the  while  in  their 
melodious  way ;  the  music  began  and  four  Indians  would 
set  off  in  a  quiet  march  round  the  fire  in  strict  time  with 
the  music.  The  tempo  gradually  quickened,  the  men  threw 
off  their  mantles  and  exhibited  themselves  adorned  with 
white  paint  daubed  all  over  their  bodies,  each  having 
a  girdle  of  bells  (reaching  from  the  shoulder  to  the  hips) 
which  jingled  in  time  to  the  music. '' 

When    preparing    for    their    dances    the    Caribs    and 

1  Th.  Baker,  /.  c,  p.  3.      -  On  dances  of  birds  cf.  Darwin,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  74. 
•*  Clavigero,  /.  c,  p.  400.    ■*  Stevenson,  /.  c,  i.  p.  403. 
^  Musters,  /.  c,  p.  81. 


ig6  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Arawaks  paint  their  whole  bodies  with  figures  of  snakes, 
birds,  and  other  animals,  while  their  hair  is  powdered  red, 
this  being  done  b}-  the  women,  an  occupation  which  some- 
times keeps  them  busy  for  days  together.  The  face  is 
covered  with  carmine,  white  and  yellow  stripes.^  The 
dances  in  Guiana  are  described  as  being  a  sort  of  carousel 
at  which  those  who  take  part  wander  round  and  round  in 
a  circle  keeping  time  with  monotonous  songs,  the  mean- 
ingless text  of  which  is  generally  "  hia-hia-hia ".  This 
movement  is  now  and  again  interrupted  by  copious  libations 
which  alternate  with  a  round  or  two  of  the  dance.^  On 
the  same  principle — but  minus  the  drink — is  the  Warau 
dance  in  Guiana."^ 

The  Bahama  negro  dance  is  full  of  uncultured  grace. 
A  dancer  begins  accompanied  by  a  tambourine  and  triangle, 
while  various  individuals  in  the  crowd  keep  time  by  beating 
of  feet  upon  the  rough  floor,  and  slapping  of  hands  against 
their  legs.* 

The  importance  of  time  and  the  consequent  unity  of 
dance  and  music  is  unmistakable  among  all  primitive 
people.  I  am  almost  afraid  that  my  readers  will  be 
already  wearied  b}-  the  numerous  examples  of  this  kind 
quoted  in  this  and  in  other  chapters.  I  cannot,  however, 
alter  the  facts,  and  think  I  am  justified  in  maintaining 
once  more  its  importance  as  one  of  the  most  weighty 
results  of  our  ethnological  researches. 

There  are,  too,  some  tribes  which  have  neither  original 
dances  nor  original  music — for  instance,  the  Copper 
Indians.  They  borrow  their  dances  from  the  Dog-ribs 
Indians  (North  America),  who  accompany  them  with  songs. 
These  Indians  are  in  point  of  fact  the  dancing  masters  of 
the  country.-^  Another  example  of  danceless  and  musicless 
Indians  in  South  America   (chap.  i.  p.  54)  probably  rests 

1  C.  Quandt,  /.  c,  p.  2.  -  Im  Thurn,  /.  c,  p.  309. 

^Wood,  /.  (-.,  ii.  p.  6ig.  ^  Edwards,  /.  c,  p.  524. 

'Franklin,  /.  c,  p.  291. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  ig7 

Upon  insufficient  investigation  or  rather  on  the  reticence  of 
the  race  in  expression  of  their  feehngs,  for  even  among  them, 
as  has  ah-eady  been  said,  a  modest  attempt  at  a  dance 
was  noticed.  Unfortunately  original,  harmless,  and  even 
useful  pleasure  of  savage  dances  has  often  been  partially 
suppressed  by  the  misdirected  efforts  of  culture.  Fritsch, 
at  any  rate,  says  that  the  majority  of  those  Africans  who 
have  come  in  contact  with  missionaries  have  been  taught 
to  detest  dance  music. ^  It  is  hardly  possible  to  attempt 
the  civilisation  of  those  tribes  in  a  more  inappropriate 
way.  It  is  as  if  a  child  were  forbidden  to  be  a  child  ;  by 
this  it  would  at  the  same  time  be  deprived  of  the  possibility 
of  becoming  a  man.  Again  and  again  travellers  have 
spoken  in  most  praiseworthy  terms  of  these  dances  and  of 
the  good  feeling  aroused  by  their  means — thus  Burchell 
(chap.  i.).  Lander  says  "the  nightly  moon-dances  in 
Africa  are  the  most  beautiful,  most  harmless,  most  peace- 
ful of  pleasures  possible  '" ;  in  fact  he  could  not  speak  too 
highly  of  them."' 

So  important  and  so  honourable  is  participation  in  the 
dance  considered  by  many  African  tribes  that  even  the  king 
himself  will  take  a  chief  part.  He  will  come  out  before  his 
subjects  and  lead  a  dance,  e.g.,  in  Dahomey,^  among 
the  Kanima,*  at  Wowow  and  Bussang  (Niger). ^  In 
Manyema  (E.  Africa)  the  dance  is  the  king's  prerogative. 
When  he  chooses  a  good-looking  woman  for  a  partner  the 
royal  invitation  to  the  dance  is  equivalent  to  an  offer  of 
marriage,  and  the  consequence  of  such  an  arrangement 
is  that  innumerable  complications  arise.'' 

"  In  some  cases  dances  are  considered  a  part  of 
religious  rite,  just  as  smoking  and  intoxication.  And  this 
is  by  no  means  confined  to  mere  savages.    In  the  middle  ages 


I  Fritsch,  Die  Eingib.,  p.  igi.        -  Lander,  Rcc.  of  Clapp.,  i.  pp.  294-298. 

^Wood,  /.  c,  i.  p.  645.  ^  Ibid.,  p.  567. 

5  Lander,  Niger,  ii.  pp.  175-177.        Cameron,  /.  c,  p.  268. 


ig8  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

there  were  several  sacred  dances  in  the  CathoHc  church,"^ 
and  processions  are  still  customary.  In  Nubia  songs 
and  dances  resembling  those  of  the  dervishes  but  of 
livelier  rhythm  than  that  of  the  Arabs  form  part  of  a 
religious  ceremony.-  In  its  intensity  of  excitement  it 
creates  an  almost  terrible  impression.  The  religious 
purpose  is,  ho\ve\er,  neither  a  necessary  part  of  the 
dance  festivals  nor  is  dancing  obligatory  to  the  religious 
solemnities.  The  Australian  corrobberree  has  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  religion, ^  and  in  the  Temple  of  Eap 
in  the  Carolines  songs  and  dances  do  not  occur.'^  On  the 
other  hand,  mysteries  are  so  closely  connected  with  dancing 
among  savages  that  "  to  dance  this  or  that  means  to  be 
acquainted  with  this  or  that  myth,  which  is  represented 
in  a  dance  or  ballet  d' action  "'.^ 

The  dance  in  Africa  also  forms  part  of  the  funeral 
ceremonies,  a  fact  which  is  in  direct  opposition  to  our 
modern  \-iew.  The  Sulima  (West  Africa,  east  of  the 
Sierra  Leone  coast)  bury  their  dead  in  perfect  silence. 
Within  a  month  after  this  they  assemble  again  round  the 
grave,  the  men  dancing  and  shouting,  the  "  Jelle"  playing 
and  singing,  the  women  dancing.  Only  on  these  occa- 
sions the  dancing  women  are  allowed  to  make  indecent 
gestures.*"  Baker  witnessed  a  funeral  dance  of  the  Latuka: 
the  dancers  were  decorated  with  ostrich  feathers,  monkey 
or  leopard  skins,  and  carried  iron  bells  covered  in  leather 
and  tied  round  the  waist.  These  bells  they  rang  "  by 
jerking  their  posteriors  in  the  most  absurd  manner  ".  The 
indescribable  noise  was  increased  by  the  beating  of  seven 
nogaras  tuned  differently  and  by  blowing  the  antilope 
horns  which  each  dancer  wore  round  his  neck.  The 
women  remained  outside  the  row   of  dancers   dancing  a 

^  Lubbock,  Oi'ig.  Civ.,  pp.  260  and  527,  with  numerous  examples. 
-  Brugsch,  /.  c,  p.  254.  •' W^ood,  /.  c,  p.  38. 

*  Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  125.  ^  A.  Lang,  Myth.  Rel.  Rit.,  i.  p.  2S3. 

"  Laing,  /.  c,  p.  368. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  I99 

slow,  stupid  Step,  and  screaming  a  wild  and  most  in- 
harmonious chant,  whilst  boys  and  girls  in  another  row 
beat  time  with  their  feet.^  A  dance  at  the  grave  of  a 
deceased  person  is  still  common  in  Nubia,  the  entire 
ceremony  appearing  in  the  highest  degree  barbarous  and 
artificial.  Miss  Edwards,  who  was  a  frequent  witness  of 
the  scene,  propounded  the  query  as  to  whether  this  was  a 
custom  originated  in  "  savage  Africa  "  or  an  old  Egyptian 
tradition.  For  herself  she  decided  that  its  origin  was  most 
probably  Ethiopian.-  To  judge  from  already  mentioned 
examples,  I  believe  that  we  can  trace  back  these  funeral 
dances  to  a  custom  which  prevailed  among  the  original 
population  of  Africa  before  the  time  of  Egyptian  civilisa- 
tion, which  might  have  been  handed  down  from  these 
tribes  to  ancient  civilised  Egypt.  The  lamentation  itself 
is  a  definite  musical  phrase  executed  by  women  who, 
beginning  on  a  high  note,  proceed  down  the  scale  in  third- 
tones  to  the  lower  octave  or  even  the  twelfth.  It  is  taught, 
like  the  zaghareet,  or  cry  of  joy,  by  mothers  to  their  young 
daughters  in  their  earliest  years.  Perhaps,  Miss  Edwards 
suggests,  it  may  be  the  identical  phrase  which  formerly 
was  sung  over  the  Pharaohs  in  the  royal  tombs. ^ 

That  which  exercises  the  most  powerful  inducement  to 
men  to  dance  seems  to  be  the  same  as  that  in  the  animal 
kingdom.  I  need  not  mention,  however,  the  numerous 
examples  in  the  animal  kingdom,  for  I  can  refer  to  the 
interesting  chapter  of  Darwin's  on  the  subject  in  his 
Descent  of  Man.^  The  frequent  occurrence  of  indecent 
dances  among  men  points  to  the  same  idea.  It  is,  how- 
ever, a  matter  of  difficulty  to  speak  of  decent  or  indecent 
dances,  for  each  people  must  be  judged  from  the  point  of 
view  of  its  own  customs,  and  such  judgments  can  only  be 


S.  W.  Baker,  Albert  Nyaiiza,  I.  c,  i.  p.  243. 

A.  B.  Edwards,  /.  c,  p.  251.  ^  Ibid.,  p.  252. 

Darwin,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  74. 


200  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

formed  after  many  years  of  observation,  and  above  all  by 
an  open  unprejudiced  mind. 

The  natives  of  Timbuktu,  who  played  both  at  chess 
and  draughts  at  a  time  when  the  Europeans  scarcely  knew 
of  the  place,  have  among  them  also  jugglers,  conjurers, 
and  ventriloquists.  Their  music,  of  which  they  have 
twenty-four  different  kinds,  pleased  Mr.  Shabeeny  very 
much ;  some  of  their  dances  were  highly  improper.^  Of 
the  West  African  negroes  Mr.  Corry  relates :  On  changing 
a  dance  "the  originator  delivers  a  solemn  oration  about 
musical  instruments,  into  which  he  generalh'  introduces 
a  description  of  some  warlike  undertaking  "  ;  after  this  the 
dance  is  renewed,  especially  by  the  women,  who  as  a  rule 
totally  disregard  decorum.  The  men  express  their  satis- 
faction by  applauding,  but  sometimes  feelings  of  shame 
arise  in  the  young  women,  who  flee  for  protection  to  the 
elders  of  their  sex.^  The  Kimbunda  tribes  in  Africa  have 
numerous  dances,  songs,  and  entertainments  of  all  sorts  ; 
both  sexes  dance,  and  very  indecently  too.  The  chief 
begins  and  is  followed  by  the  warriors.  Next  the  captives 
are  killed,  roasted  well  and  eaten,  and  then  the  women 
are  allowed  to  appear,  who,  although  their  part  is  to 
represent  the  ''  lad}-  of  the  house,"  are  often  more  shame- 
less than  the  men.  The  entire  company  becomes  intoxi- 
cated at  last  and  continues  dancing  and  singing  all  night 
until  the  morning.^  The  wedding  dance  Batuk  is  for- 
bidden in  the  streets  of  Loando  on  account  of  the  many 
improper  gestures  which  attend  it.  Men  and  women  place 
themselves  in  a  circle  at  the  sound  of  the  kiptiita  (a  sort 
of  drum)  ;  those  standing  round  begin  a  short  monotonous 
song.  It  is  repeated  for  hours  together,  the  dancers  also 
taking  part.  They  all  turn  and  wind  round  on  one  spot, 
gesticulating  and  rubbing  their  backs  one  against  the  other 
until  one  falls  exhausted,  whereupon  another  immediately 

'  Shabeeny,  /.  c,  p.  25.  -Corry,  /.  c,  pp.  67-68. 

^  Magyar,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  312-314. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  201 

takes  his  place.  At  times  a  man  and  a  woman  will  jump 
into  the  middle  of  the  circle  from  opposite  directions  and 
bump  their  stomachs  against  one  another.  At  times  the 
man  raises  the  girl  up  in  the  air,  who  leaps  up  from 
behind  on  his  shoulders.^  Mrs.  Ida  Pfeiffer  describes  a 
dance  in  Madagascar  at  which  the  dancer,  whenever  he 
approached  any  of  the  women,  made  expressive  gestures 
without  being  in  the  least  deterred  by  the  presence  of  the 
Europeans.  His  actions  aroused  shouts  of  laughter  and 
obstreperous  applause  from  the  audience.'- 

The  Narrinyeri  tribes  in  Australia  (at  the  Lakes  Alex- 
andrina  and  Albert,  and  the  Lower  Murray  Ri\er)  ha^■e 
various  descriptions  of  corrobberrees  which  are  usually 
danced  b}'  the  men  only,  while  the  women  sit  on  the 
ground  and  sing.  Their  songs  are  sometimes  harmless 
and  their  dances  not  indecent ;  at  other  times  (according 
to  the  Rev.  Geo.  Taplin's  account)  they  are  obscene.  The 
women's  dances  are  altogether  "  immodest  and  lewd,"  and 
when  they  take  place  the  men  sit  on  the  ground  and  sing. 
Mr.  Taplin  says  :  "  Although  I  stood  in  the  dark  alone  and 
nobody  knew  that  I  was  there,  I  felt  ashamed  to  look  upon 
such  abominations".^  Nevertheless  he  compares  these 
"immodest  and  lewd"  dances  to  the  dance  of  Egyptian 
women,  as  illustrated  in  Cobbin's  Family  Bible  at  St.  Luke 
vii.  32.  The  resemblances,  he  adds,  "could  not  ha\e 
been  more  exact  ".  The  dances  of  the  Tasmanians  were 
"  no  more  renowned  for  their  purity  than  were  those  of 
civilised  people  ".^ 

Most  New  Zealand  dances,  of  which  the  natives  are 
particularly  fond,  are,  according  to  Rev.  R.  Taylor,  very 
indecorous  ;  *''  Lubbock  mentions  two  kinds,  "warlike  and 
amorous,"  *^'  while  Meinicke  declares  them  to  be  lascivious.'' 

'  Lux,  /.  c,  p.  38.  -  Pfeiffer,  Madag.,  p.  1S6. 

'■''  Taplin,  /.  c,  p.  38.  ^  Bonwick,  /.  c,  p.  36. 

•''  R.  Taylor,  /.  c,  p.  349.  ''  Lubbock,  Pvch.  Times,  p.  467. 
"  Meinicke,  /.  c,  i.  p.  330. 


202  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

The  dances  in  Fiji  are  an}-thinj^  but  decorous.^  Song 
and  dance  at  Nukahiva  consist  of  a  continuous  hop  in  one 
spot,  during  which  the  dancers  occasionally  raise  their 
arms,  making  a  rapid  tremulous  movement  with  their 
fingers.  To  this  time  is  beaten  with  the  hands.  The 
song  is  more  of  a  howl  than  a  regular  concert  of  voices,  but 
the  inhabitants  seem  satisfied  with  this  so  much  as  to 
make  Mr.  Krusenstern  doubt  whether  the  natives  of  Nuka- 
hiva would  be  affected  at  all  b}-  the  best  European  music.^ 
At  the  night  dances  in  Samoa  all  kinds  of  obscenity  in 
looks,  language,  and  gesture  prevailed.^  Langsdorf  relates 
that  in  Nukahiva  and  Tahiti  the  women  appear  entirely 
naked  at  the  dance  festivals,  "  a  fact  which  gives  rise  to 
much  indecency "."'  Speaking  of  Polynesian  dances,  the 
hula-hula  had  the  worst  reputation  of  all ;  the  melod}' 
which  accompanied  it  was  somewhat  complicated,  although 
the  text  consisted  of  only  two  constantly  repeated  sentences.^ 
Buchner  heard  some  Pol3nesian  }'ouths  singing  a  four- 
part  male  chorus  which,  it  is  true,  had  been  taught  them 
by  missionaries,  but  which  nevertheless  testified  to  their 
musical' talent.  The  Polynesian  haka,  borrowed  from  the 
Maoris,  originally  had  the  same  object  as  the  hula-hula. 
The  song  connected  with  it  was  composed  of  two  or  three 
notes  which  rose  to  a  veritable  howl  and  ended  in  a  sharp, 
short  note,  the  effect  of  a  sudden  silence  which  immediately 
followed  being  most  surprising.**  This  kind  of  passionate 
and  indecent  dance,  very  common  in  Polynesia,  seems  to 
be  some\\hat  idealised  b}'  the  more  civilised  Malays  of 
Java,  where  Mr.  Bock  witnessed  a  dance  at  the  end  of 
which  the  male  dancer  kissed  his  partner. "" 

Hindus  and  Mohammedans  in  India  consider  it  un- 
dignified for  an  honest  man  or  an  honourable  woman  to 

^  Lubbock,  Prch.  Times,  p.  456.  -  Krusenstern,  /.  c,  p.  333. 

•^Turner,  Samoa,  p.   125;  Polyii.,  p.  211.  ■'Langsdorf,  p.  132. 

5  Buchner,  Still.  Oz.,  p.  354.  ''  Ibid.,  p.  143. 
"  Bock,  /.  c,  p.  12. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  203 

dance.  The  Brahmins,  who  allow  no  European  nor 
Hindu  of  a  lower  caste  to  enter  their  temples,  permit 
dancing  girls  who  are  of  lower  caste  and  lead  immoral 
lives  to  do  so,  because,  as  they  say,  professional  dancers 
are  required  for  their  religious  feasts.^  Nevertheless  both 
Hindus  and  Mohammedans  look  on  at  a  dance  with  great 
delight,  and  also  listen  to  their  own  noisy  music  while 
hating  that  of  Europeans."-  Mr.  Niebuhr  tells  us :  For 
an  honest  Mohammedan  it  is  taken  amiss  if  he  were  to 
show  his  ability  in  dancing.^  The  same  is  the  case  with 
the  Turks  and  Arabs.'^  Mohammedans  have  a  \ery  low 
opinion  of  our  ladies  because  they  dance  with  strange 
men  ;  but  they  are  allowed  -to  dance  before  the  men  and 
among  themselves  in  ladies'  parties.  On  such  occasions 
each  lady  appears  as  beautifully  dressed  as  possible,  dances 
with  her  slaves,  and  changes  her  dresses  eight  to  ten 
times  in  the  evening."*  Mr.  Niebuhr  tells  us  of  a  Greek 
lady — the  Greeks  are  particularh*  fond  of  dancing — who 
during  an  evening  party  changed  her  dress  and  furred 
coat  hve  times  within  two  hours.  Speaking  of  the  Ostiak 
dances  (animal  pantomimes)  Mr.  Georgi  says  :  "  One  can 
easily  imagine  that  the  gestures  in  them  are  not  rarely 
immodest  ".'^  It  is  significant  that  in  the  language  of  the 
Omawhaws  (North  American  Indians)  the  word  "  watche  " 
means  both  "dance"  and  "  sexual  intercourse  ".'' 

Very  much  rarer  are  the  examples  of  dances  which  in 
no  wa}'  wound  the  European  sense  of  propriet}' ;  at  the 
same  time  it  must  be  observed  that  both  classes  of  dances, 
decent  and  indecent,  may  occur  among  one  and  the  same 

1  Haafner,  /.  c,  pp.  372-373. 

-Ibid.,  I.  c,  p.  172  ;  the  dancing  girls  are  concubines  of  the  Brahmins 
and  of  other  high  caste  men,  that  they  might  not  be  obHged  to  have  inter- 
course with  girls  of  a  lower  rank.  Details  about  Indian  dancing  girls,  ibid., 
pp.  177-178,  244-248,  309-312. 

•*  Niebuhr,  /.  c,  i.  p.  182.  "^  Ibid.,  p.  175. 

'^  Ibid.,  pp.  182-184.  ®  Georgi,  /.  c,  p.  80. 

"  Long,  Rock.  Mount.,  i.  p.  338. 


204  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

tribe.  The  dances  on  Bornabi  (Caroline  Islands)  are  by 
no  means  indecorous,  and  are  performed  by  unmarried 
men  and  .skirls,  Vvho  keep  time  to  the  music  by  graceful 
movements  of  the  arms,  legs,  and  indeed  of  the  whole 
body.^  In  Tahiti  pregnant  women  are  debarred  (for  the 
time  being)  from  dancing  the  Timorodee.-  In  Java  Mr. 
Jukes  witnessed  a  pantomime  performed  by  four  3'oung 
maidens  who  in  no  way  behaved  improperly,  yet  they  were 
considered  courtesans  by  profession.  Into  their  songs 
were  introduced  notes  of  such  shrillness  and  harshness 
as  he  had  never  previously  heard. ^  The  quietness  and 
modesty  of  the  Bushmen  and  Hottentots  during  their 
dances  have  been  frequently  remarked,  and  the  great 
decorum  observed  in  those  of  the  Mandingoes  is  at  times 
striking.'*  The  dance  in  Murzuk  performed  by  men  and 
women  is  in  no  way  indecent ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
slowness  and  regularity  of  the  movements  is  both  elegant 
and  pleasing.^  The  Fiji  dance,  Meke-meke,  is  performed 
by  boys  and  girls,  for  whom  an  old  musician  plays  ;  the 
melody,  which  is  sung  simultaneously,  always  repeats  the 
same  rhythmical  movement,  — -  -,  within  the  compass  of 
a  few  tones.  The  girls  display  considerable  grace  and 
coquet  like  Europeans  with  "•  their  accursed  large  black 
e}-es  ".  Despite  this,  however,  they  are  not  immodest,  but 
enjoy  pure  pleasure  in  the  rhythmical  movements  and 
songs.^'  Mrs.  Wallis,  too,  holds  the  opinion  that  at  Fiji 
dances  one  may  learn  at  least  modesty,''  The  Abipones 
(South  American  Indians)  always  have  decent  dances.^ 

The  part  taken  by  the  two  sexes  in  the  dance  is  worthy 
of  note.  To  judge  by  the  experience  one  can  gain  in 
civilised  countries,  it  is  not  surprising  that  among  savages 
the  women,    both    quantitatively  and   qualitatively,    busy 

^  Angas,  Polyii.,  p.  384.  -  Cook,  First  Vovage,  in  Pink.  Coll..  xi.  p.  520. 

^  Jukes,  /.  (-.,  ii.  p.  50.  •*Caillie,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  73. 

"  Lyon,  /.  c,  p.  174.  •>  Buchner,  Still.  Oz.,  p.  273. 

"  Bonwick,  /.  c,  p.  36.  ^  Dobrizhoffer,  /.  c,  i.  p.  66. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  205 

themselves  most  with  the  dance,  a  fact  which  is  the  more 
remarkable  as  the  dances  of  savages  are  much  more 
exhausting  than  ours. 

The  Fans  in  Africa,  who  have  an  excellent  musical  ear, 
are  passionate  dancers,  the  endurance  of  the  women  being 
almost  incredible.  [Toiite  coiniiie  chcz  nous.)  "  Never  did 
I  see  female  endurance  equal  this,"  says  Mr.  Reade.^ 
Among  the  Bagirmi  the  women  are  mentioned  as  being 
exceptionally  good  dancers,-  and  they  sing  heartily  while 
dancing.  A  popular  national  dance  of  the  women  in  Logon 
consisted  in  their  moving  to  musical  accompaniments 
round  in  a  circle  from  which  they  attempted  to  eject  each 
other  by  pushing  with  their  posteriors.  The  victor  con- 
tinued dancing  in  triumph  until  she  too  was  finally  ejected.^ 
Similar  "jokes"  frequently  occur  in  Africa.  The  beautiful 
women  of  the  Shuas  (Sudan)  in  a  similar  dance  come 
together  with  such  violence  as  to  burst  the  belt  of  beads 
w^iich  they  carry  round  their  hips  and  which  represents  a 
value  of  fifteen  to  twenty  dollars.*  The  Sura  women,  too, 
in  India,  dance  a  wedding  dance  on  the  same  lines. ^  C. 
Long  describes  a  dance  of  twelve  girls  in  Khartum,  who, 
with  a  peculiar  clucking  sound  made  by  compression  of 
the  lips  against  the  teeth,  moved  in  concert  with  the  tam- 
bourine, while  their  jingling  bracelets  marked  the  time 
of  the  music.*^  A  women's  dance  at  Kordofan  was  ac- 
companied by  a  monotonous  song  and  hand-clapping, 
time  being  beaten  "with  the  right  fore  foot "  ^  ("  mit 
dem  rechten  Vorderfuss,"  as  Mr.  Heuglin  literally  says). 
Speaking  of  the  women  in  Madagascar  Mr.  Rochon  relates 
the  following  custom  :  "  While  the  Malagasy  arc  at  war 
their  wives  continue  singing  and  dancing  during  the  day, 
and  even  through  a  great  part  of  the  night ;  they  believe 

^  Wood,  /.  f.,  i.  p.  603.  -Ibid.,  p.  711. 

■■'  Nachtigal,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  521.  ''  Wood,  /.  c\,  i.  p.  702. 

'"Ibid.,  ii.  p.  750  (with  illustr.).  *^  Ch.  Long,  /.  c,  p.  19. 
^  Heuglin,  /.  c,  p.  37. 


206  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

that  such  continual  dancing  inspires  their  husbands  and 
augments  both  their  strength  and  courage".^  When  the 
war  is  over  they  all  assemble  at  sunset  and  begin  to  dance 
and  sing  in  a  most  noisy  manner  with  instrumental  ac- 
companiment. During  these  dances  a  good  deed  is  as 
much  praised  as  a  wrong  one  is  ironised,  so  that  Mr. 
Rochon  says  of  them  :  "  Les  jeux  sont  des  le9ons  utiles; 
on  y  celebre  les  belles  actions,  et  on  s'y  moque  des 
ridicules".  In  some  sense  this  may  remain  true  for 
games  of  all   sorts,  times  and  countries. 

Among  the  Australians  the  wildness  of  the  women, 
when  excited,  surpasses  that  of  the  men.-  In  the  time  of 
a  popular  tumult  the  same  may  be  observed  among  us  ;  the 
women  are  always  in  the  foremost  rank.  In  Australia 
when  an  old  woman  has  begun  to  sing  she  will  not  cease 
until  completely  exhausted,  then  another  will  take  up  the 
burthen  and  continue  the  song.  The  effect  of  these  songs 
is  immense ;  they  are  in  fact  the  causes  of  most  disturb- 
ances.^ Among  the  aborigines  of  Victoria  the  women 
generally  are  the  musicians,  and  their  performance  is  led 
by  a  leader  (usually  an  elderly  man)  who  beats  time  with 
the  corrobberree  sticks.  The  time  kept  by  the  performers 
and  the  women  who  beat  the  opossum  skins,  and  the 
accuracy  with  which  the  movements  are  executed,  is 
astonishing.* 

In  Magindanao  (Philipp.)the  women  indulged  in  a  dance 
of  their  own  ;  fifteen  of  them  formed  a  semicircle  in  which 
they  moved  backwards  and  forwards.  The  first  sang  for 
three  or  four  minutes,  then  dropped  off  and  the  next  took 
the  song  exactly  as  the  first  had  done,  the  entire  perform- 
ance lasting  about  an  hour.  At  such  festivals  (in  the 
Sultan's  palace)  the  men  pay  no  attention  to  the  women. ^ 
On  Amsterdam  and   Middleburgh  Islands  the  women  sing 

1  Rochon,  /.  c,  pp.  37-38.  2  Grey,  Austr.,  p.  314. 

'■^  Ibid.,  p.  316.  "'Br.  Smyth,  /.  c,  i.  p.   16S. 

°  Th.  Forrest,  New  Guinea,  pp.  245-246. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  207 

and  accompany  themselves  by  snapping  with  their  fingers.^ 
On  the  Sandwich  Islands  the  women  are  the  principal 
dancers  and  keep  in  time  to  the  sounds  of  a  drum  ac- 
companied by  a  song  in  which  they  all  join.  On  these 
occasions  the  women  display  all  their  finer}',  particularly 
in  European  clothes  if  they  are  so  fortunate  as  to  possess 
any.-  With  us  they  seem  to  display  the  gifts  of  nature 
rather,  if  they  are  so  fortunate  as  to  possess  any.  The 
Dyaks  of  Borneo  have  public  dancing  girls  (Bolian  or 
Blian) ;  ^  to  most  women  is  known  the  art  of  powdering 
the  face.*  Malay  women  in  Sumatra  never  dance,  but  in 
Java  both  sexes  do.^ 

At  Sagar,  in  the  Central  Provinces  of  India,  the  women 
dance  while  the  men  look  on ;  "^  in  Southern  India  the 
native  dancing  women  are  generally  better  dressed  and 
wear  more  clothes  than  the  others.  Men  make  their  own 
clothes  and  women  their  own  jackets.''  The  often-praised 
dance  of  the  Bajadirs  in  India  did  not  call  forth  any 
praise  from.  Mr.  Sainte  Croix.  They  still  have  clappers 
on  their  ankles  and  accompany  their  own  songs  them- 
selves, only  making  use  of  semitones.^  [The  author 
may  mean  the  notes  of  the  so-called  black  keys  which 
may  point  to  a  pentatonic  scale.]  In  Tonking  only 
women  dance,  and  they  have  to  sing  at  the  same  time.^ 

The  women  of  the  Apache  Indians  "do  the  principal 
part  of  the  dancing  ".^°  On  Queen  Charlotte  Island 
women  dance  at  the  festivals  while  the  men  stand  in  a 
circle  beating  time  with  sticks,  which,  with  tambourines, 
are  their  sole  instruments.     Their  songs  are  simple  and 


1  Cook,  Second  Voyage,  in  Pink.  Coll.,  xi.  p.  594. 

2  Campbell,  I.  c,  p.  203.  ^  Hein,  /.  c,  p.  28. 
■*  Bock,  I.  c,  p.  13.  ^Ibid.,  p.  12. 

•*  Murray- Ansley,  /.  c,  p.  253.  ''  Shortt,  /.  c,  p.  392. 

^  Sainte  Croix,  /.  c,  p.  258. 

"  Baron,  I.  c,  p.  672  ;  Richard,  /.  6-.,  p.  726. 

1'*  Henry,  in  Schoolcraft's  Arcli.,  vol.  v.  p.  212. 


208  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

monotonous  and  accompany  most  of  their  dances  and 
ceremonies.  On  this  island  Mr.  Mackenzie  heard  soft 
plaintive  tones  which  sounded  like  church  music.^  The 
Iroquois  have  special  dances  for  women  side  by  side  with 
dances  for  men  only ;  this  is  often  the  case  with  many 
Indian  tribes,  and  therefore  we  will  describe  such  dances 
later  on  together  with  the  men's  dances.  For  the  present 
we  may  state  that  the  women's  share  in  the  dance  is  still 
greater  than  in  the  music  (c/.  chap,  ii.),  and  as  the  most 
primitive  music  is  only  that  of  a  choral  dance,  primitive 
music  owes  more  to  women  than  to  men.  It  is  a  pity 
that  this  excellent  womanly  attribute  has  been  so  suppressed 
in  the  course  of  civilisation,  and  that  this  fact  and  the 
regard  for  women  generally  did  not  begin  to  be  recognised 
and  shown  until  in  the  very  youngest  phase  of  culture, 
and  this  only  gradually. 

With  the  above-mentioned  ethnological  facts  in  hand 
we  shall  be  in  a  position  to  meet  a  widely  promulgated 
error.  A  certain  doctor  once  wrote  to  a  lady  who  wished 
to  go  on  the  stage  :  "  The  genius  of  musical  composition  is 
/hoiiune,'  and  accept  it  as  a  compliment  when  I  say  that 
you  are  essentially  'femnie''".  To  this  Upton  question- 
ingly  replies :  "  Is  there  any  instance  in  modern  times, 
perhaps  in  any  times,  of  a  female  composer  who  attains 
even  to  the  eminence  of  a  third-rate  opera  writer  ?  "  -  It 
is  true  there  are  very  few  female  composers  at  present  and 
they  are  not  first-rate  either.  In  primitive  times,  how- 
ever, women  did  incomparably  more  for  the  reproduction 
as  well  as  for  the  production  of  music.  Donovan  seems 
to  think  otherwise,  for  he  says :  "  Woman  did  nothing 
whatever  for  the  first  steps  of  musical  development,  be- 
cause she  could  have  felt  none  of  that  strong  impulse  to 
listen  again.  But  who  dare  deny  that  women  of  to-day 
possess   deep   appreciation    of   music  ?  "  "^      This   impulse, 

1  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  170.  -  Upton,  /.  c,  p.  21. 

■'  Donovan,  Mtis.  Act.,  p.  117. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  20g 

in  his  opinion,  la}'  with  the  man  in  the  connection  of 
primitive  music  with  action  of  the  body,  or  dramatic 
action.  Unfortunately  Donovan  did  not  turn  this  excellent 
remark  to  further  account,  for  he  probably  overlooked  the 
fact  that  it  is  just  for  this  very  "  action  of  the  body  "  that 
the  woman  has  a  stronger  impulse  than  the  man,  because 
she  who  as  a  rule  neither  fights  nor  hunts  stores  up  a 
greater  "  surplus  of  vigour".  This  is  the  peculiar  char- 
acter that  woman  possessed  in  primitive  time  as  proved 
by  ethnological  examples,  and  this  is  as  a  rule  the  same 
character  she  possesses  to-day  ;  she  is  still  the  one  who 
dances  more  frequently  and  energetically  than  men.  Mr. 
Donovan's  further  question,  however,  contains  no  doubt 
some  truth  :  "  Who  dare  deny  that  women  of  to-day 
possess  deep  appreciation  of  music  ?  "  "  Appreciation  " 
certainly ;  this,  however,  is  not  the  question,  but  musical 
activity  in  the  form  of  composition,  and  this  is  less  to-day 
than  in  primitive  times. 

There  are  a  few  tribes  in  which  only  the  men  dance, 
or  at  any  rate  there  are  certain  dances  in  which  only  they 
are  allowed  to  take  part.  But  it  is  characteristic  that 
sometimes  dances  would  not  be  complete  without  the 
women's  part,  and  consequently  their  rules  have  to  be 
played  by  men.  This  occurs  in  the  Keche  dance  in  the 
Marotse  Kingdom  (Africa)  which  is  performed  by  two 
men,  one  of  whom  represents  a  woman. ^  In  the  cor- 
robberree  at  Darling  Downs  in  Queensland  only  rnen 
dance."'  Among  the  Lincoln  tribes  in  Australia  only  two 
or  three  women  may  join  in  the  dance  at  the  same  time, 
although  they  all  sing.^  In  Tahiti,  however,  the  men 
rarely  dance,'*  while  among  the  Papuans  men  are  generally 
the  dancers,  and  perform  as  w^ell  as  possible  for  they  know 
that  the  women  like  it.     Their  movements   are   of  such 


Ratzel,  /.  c,  i.  p.  382.  -  Beckler,  /.  c,  p.  82. 

Schiirmann,  I.e.,  p.  243.  ^  Meinicke,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  i8g. 

14 


210  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

grace  as  to  be  almost  an  ideal  for  our  ballet  dancers.^ 
Mr.  Miklukha  Maklay,  who  was  the  hrst  to  visit  certain 
parts  of  New  Guinea,  saw  only  men  dancing.  Some  of 
the  men  went  round  a  fire  in  one  circle,  while  others 
stood  in  a  second,  women  and  children  in  a  third.  The 
entire  company  moved  in  time  to  the  music,  which  was 
kept  up  almost  all  night,  and  only  after  becoming  com- 
pletely exhausted  did  they  cease  and  take  their  meal.- 
Among  the  Arabs  of  Hyderabad  only  the  men  dance  while 
the  women  look  on,  the  female  rules  being  played  by  boys 
who  wear  on  such  occasions  the  native  female  dress. ^ 
The  Orinoco  Indians,  too,  have  only  male  dancers,  who, 
young  and  old,  form  a  circle  holding  each  other's  hand, 
and  turn  sometimes  to  the  right,  sometimes  to  the  left 
for  whole  hours  in  silent  gravity.  Most  frequently  the 
dancers  themselves  are  the  musicians  as  well.*  The 
women  of  the  Kalushians  of  Norfolk  Sound  sit  upon  the 
ground  while  the  men  dance  and  sing  a  "  not  inharmonious 
melody  which  supplies  the  place  of  music  ".^  Among  the 
Iroquois  the  Buffalo  dance  "  Dageyagovanno  "  is  designed 
for  men  only,  but  the  women  may  take  part  in  the  "  feather 
dance  "  if  they  are  disposed.  Out  of  thirty-two  dances 
fourteen  were  for  both  sexes,  seven  for  women  only,  and 
eleven  for  men  ;  of  the  first  fourteen  three  were  costume 
dances  and  three  no  longer  in  use  ;  of  the  second  class 
three  were  costume  dances  and  six  obsolete.*^ 

It  has  often  been  observed  in  savage  dances  how 
frequently  the  sexes  dance  apart  from  each  other.  In 
Hisinene  (east  of  Tanganyika)  the  women  never  dance 
together  with  the  men,  but  sometimes  they  arrange  a 
dance  among  themselves  in  which  their  actions  and 
gestures  are  even  more  immoral  and  indecent  than  are 
those  of  the  men,  although  they  too  are  in  bad  enough 

'  Schelling,  /.  c.  -  Miklukha  Maklay,  /.  c,  p.  845. 

"*  C.  Murray-Ansley,  /.  c,  p.  251.  ^Humboldt,  /.  c,  p.  465. 

^  Langsdorf,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  114.  "  Morgan,  l.  c,  p.  290. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  211 

form.^  The  fact  that  the  dances  of  both  sexes  are  kept 
separate  is  no  proof  that  the  dance  is  thereby  rendered 
less  indecorous,  and  the  reverse.  Gurney  remarks 
a  pi'opos  of  Richard  Wagner's  statement  that  primitive 
dance  is  in  most  cases  a  love  scene:  "The  original 
people's  dance  has  nothing  to  do  with  lovers.  It  is 
curious  how  often  among  uncivilised  peoples  the  dances 
of  the  men  and  women  are  kept  separate"  (/.  c,  p.  159). 
It  is  true,  primitive  dance  is  not  a  love  scene,  as  a  rule, 
but  an  animal  pantomime,  nevertheless  it  has  to  do  with 
the  sexual  instinct,  the  separation  of  the  sexes  being  no 
proof  to  the  contrary,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  above 
examples.  Among  the  Moresco  (W.  Barbary)  men  are 
not  allowed  to  dance  with  married  women,  but  girls  may 
with  bachelors ;  the  former  are  so  closely  veiled  that  not 
any  part  of  their  bodies  is  seen  naked.  At  their  wedding 
festivals  the  married  dance  during  the  day,  the  single  at 
night.-  In  Australia  it  occurs  here  and  there  that  men 
and  women  dance  separately,^  but  they  also  dance  together 
sometimes.*  Frequently  the  women  are  mere  onlookers, 
singing  and  beating  time  on  rolled-up  opossum  skins. ^ 
Sometimes  Mr.  Oldfield  observed  the  women,  when  apart 
from  the  men,  perform  a  kind  of  waltz  among  themselves, 
far  more  graceful  in  its  measure  and  figures  than  the 
violent  dances  of  the  men.  Both  sexes  decorate  them- 
selves for  these  festive  occasions  with  the  greatest  pains, 
uttering  loud  cries  of  admiration  when  they  have  the 
opportunity  of  seeing  themselves  in  a  mirror. 

Among  the  Tasmanians  the  dance  was  thechief  pleasure 
of  the  men,  and  only  on  very  exceptional  occasions  women 
were  allowed  to  dance  with  them,  though  indulging  at 
times  in  a  merry  dance  among  themselves  at  home.      Now 


Cameron,  /.  c,  p.  40.  -Addison,  /.  c,  p,  439. 

Eyre,  Aiistr.,  ii.  p.  232.  ^  Ibid.,  p.  236. 

Oldfield,  /.  c,  pp.  256-258. 


212  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

and  then  they  were  permitted  to  dance  before  their  masters, 
"  and  they  then  became  very  mirthful  ".^ 

Among  the  Tatars  of  Kazan  "the  men  and  women 
dance  for  themselves  only  ".^ 

In  America  similar  cases  occur;  thus  among  the 
Abenakis,  Chactas,  and  Comanches  the  women  dance  the 
same  dance  as  the  men,  but  after  them  and  always  out  of 
their  sight. ^ 

The  Sioux  Indians  are  so  fond  of  singing  and  dancing 
that  Catlin  called  them  the  "  Dancing  Indians,"  as  they 
had  dances  for  every  occasion  and  for  every  hour  of  the 
day.  In  them  the  women  are  rarel}-  allowed  to  take  part, 
but  they  have  some  of  their  own,  c.^.,  the  scalp  dance,  in 
which  they  stand  in  a  circle  round  a  scalp,  jumping  from 
the  ground  in  time  to  the  beating  of  drums,  and  continually 
singing  and  keeping  time  all  together  admirably.*  The 
women  of  the  Californian  Indians  are  rarely  permitted  to 
dance  with  the  men,  but  when  this  honour  is  granted 
them  they  play  a  very  subordinate  rule,  merely  swaying 
their  bodies  to  and  fro  in  silence.''  Even  when  dancing 
at  the  same  time  as  the  men  they  do  not  dance  with  them.'' 
In  some  tribes,  however,  men  and  women  unite  in  dancing.'^ 
At  the  mission  station  St.  Joseph  in  California  the  natives 
represent  in  dancing  battles  or  scenes  of  domestic  life. 
Their  music  consists  in  singing  and  clapping  with  a  stick 
which  is  split  at  one  end.  The  women  have  their  own 
particular  songs  and  their  own  style  of  dancing.  They 
hop  about  near  the  men  but  never  in  concert  with  them.*^ 

That  it  is  just  among  the  Indians  that  the  sexes  are 
so  often   separated  is  due   to  the  fact  that   they  are  not 

iBonwick,  /.  c,  p.    36.     Bonwick's  further  remark  that  most  savages 

keep  the  monopoly  of  dancing  "  for  the  mascuHne  feet  "  is  no  doubt  an 
error. 

-  Georgi,  /.  c,  p.  105.  '^  Domenech,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  igg,  214. 

■*  Waitz,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  211.  '^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  393. 

'^  Ibid.,  p.  416.  "  Schoolcraft,  Arcli.,  v.  pp.  214-215. 

*  Langsdorf,  /.  c. ,  ii.  p.  196. 


DANCE    AND    MUSIC.  213 

accustomed  openly  to  express  their  feelings,  and  this  more 
particularly  in  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes.  In  Yucatan 
ballets  were  performed  in  which  as  many  as  800  dancers 
took  part,  but  "  it  was  not  customary  for  the  men  and 
women  to  dance  together  ".^ 

It  is,  however,  the  rule  among  savages  that  both  sexes 
dance  together.  This  is  the  case  among  the  New  Zea- 
landers,  who,  moreover,  have  dances  for  men  or  women 
only ;  -  and  this  is  the  case  in  the  Gilbert  and  Marshall 
Islands,^  and  at  times  in  Samoa ;  *  in  these  dances  the 
feeling  for  symmetry  is  quite  unmistakable.  On  the 
Caroline  Islands  many  kinds  of  festivities  take  place 
which  are  shared  in  by  the  two  sexes  separately  or  by 
both  together.-'' 

On  a  journey  from  Spiti  to  Lahul  through  the  Sutlej 
valley  in  the  Himalaya  Mrs.  Murray-Ansley  saw  dances 
performed  by  both  sexes,  the  accompaniment  being  a 
melodious  song,  of  which  at  times  four  bars  were  sung 
and  four  whistled  alternately.'^  Among  the  Chukchi  both 
sexes  dance  together.'^  In  New  Mexico  the  dance  is 
performed  either  by  a  single  dancer  or  by  a  very  large 
number  of  both  sexes, ^  and  music  is  their  in\ariable 
accompaniment.  The  dance  of  the  Indians  in  Guiana 
was  not  much  more  than  a  measured  series  of  steps  by 
men  and  women.  A  monotonous  chant  sung  in  unison, 
the  jingling  of  bracelets  and  anklets  made  of  hard  seeds, 
and  the  wings  of  beetles  was  the  accompaniment.^ 


Landa,  /.  c,  p.  129.  -  R.  Taylor,  /.  c,  p.  349. 

'  Meinicke,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  342.  ""Turner,  Sam.,  p.  124;  Polyii.,  p.  210. 

'  Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  133.  "Murray-Ansley,  /.  c,  p.  281. 

Merck,  /.  c,  p.  65.  ^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  515. 

Brett,  /.  c,  p.  320. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

PRIMITIVE  DRAMA  AND  PANTOMIME. 

We  have  seen  in  the  former  chapters  how  intimately 
music  and  dancing  are  connected.  Primitive  dances  have 
in  the  most  cases  a  special  meaning :  the}-  have  to  re- 
present something  and  ha\-e  therefore  a  position  among 
the  other  arts  quite  different  from  the  modern  dances. 
At  such  representations  no  words  are  spoken,  but  mimicry 
and  gestures  are  not  less  a  language,  far  better  fitted  to 
explain  the  action  than  the  primitive  language  of  words. 
These  pantomimes,  as  we  may  call  them,  are  indeed  a 
primitive  drama,  and  as  music  is  always  connected  with 
dances  one  may  judge  how  great  the  importance  was  that 
music  had  on  these  occasions.  Dramatic  music,  or 
musical  drama,  if  }-ou  like,  is  not  an  occasional  union  of 
two  different  arts,  it  is  originally  one  organism,  and  at 
the  same  time  the  earliest  manifestation  of  human  art 
in  general.  Therefore,  Richard  Wagner's  artistic  genius 
again  correctly  defined  the  essential  character  of  the  drama 
when  he  said  :  "  Long  before  the  epic  songs  of  Homer 
had  become  a  matter  of  literar}'  concern  they  had 
flourished  among  the  people  as  actually  represented 
works  of  art,  supported  b\-  the  voice  and  gesture,  so  to 
speak,  as  concentrated,  fixed,  lyric,  dancing  songs  ("  ver- 
dichtete,  gefestigte,  lyrische  Gesangstanze"),  in  which  the 
poets'  fondness  of  resting  with  the  description  of  the  action 
and    the   repetition   of  heroic   dialogues   prevailed".^     In 

'Wagner,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  124. 
(214) 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME.  215 

one  word,  the  historical  order  of  all  the  branches  of  poetry 
does  not  begin  with  the  epos — as  frequently  taught — but 
with  the  drama,  lyric  coming  next,  the  epos  lastly.  This 
is  the  order  the  ethnologist  can  trace,  this  is  at  the  same 
time  the  most  simple  and  natural  wa}'  in  the  development 
of  poetrw  The  epos  requires  for  all  its  psychological 
details  so  much  polish  of  language,  so  much  grammar  and 
refined  style  to  follow  all  the  different  shades  of  expression 
as  to  render  very  difficult  our  expecting  this  from  very 
primitive  people.  For  the  dramatic  representation  mimicry 
and  gestures  are  not  onh'  quite  sufficient  but  the  only 
effective  means  for  explaining  the  action  to  an  audience  of 
different  tribes,  which  sometimes  do  not  understand  their 
respective  dialects  and  are  accustomed  to  converse  in 
gesture  language. 

Unfortunately  Richard  Wagner  lost  his  advantageous 
position  (just  as  in  speaking  of  dance  and  music)  when 
elaborating  his  intuitive  idea.  Then  he  called  those 
dancing  songs  "a  middleway  station  from  the  ancient 
lyric  to  the  drama,"  although  the  pantomime  cannot 
possibly  be  the  very  beginning  of  poetry  and  a  middleway 
station  at  the  same  time.  Wagner  constantly  overlooks 
the  fact  that  the  primitive  drama  is  pantomime  only,  not 
poetry  as  well,  no  words  being  spoken  in  it.  It  is  not 
until  later  on  that  other  arts,  poetry  among  them,  begin 
to  show  their  germs,  which  they  unfold  and  develop  in  the 
same  proportion  as  they  become  independent  and  separate 
themselves  from  the  common  trunk.  This  done  it  would 
be  contrary  to  all  laws  of  development  that  the  ac- 
complished arts  should  once  more  form  an  organic  union 
as  they  might  have  formed  in  their  primitive  state.  There- 
fore, the  attempt  to  unite  the  accomplished  arts  in  equal 
rank  to  a  single  art  work  is  theoretically  a  contradiction 
and  practically  an  impossibility.  The  result  of  such  an 
attempt  was  always  that  the  composer  either  spoiled  his 
art  by  a  theoretical  prejudice  or  practically  acted  contrary 


2l6  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

to  his  rules.  Wagner's  artistic  genius  was  never  in  doubt 
for  a  single  moment  which  way  to  go,  and  therefore  his 
theory  has  remained  an  intolerable  chaos,  while  his  art 
has  flourished  in  unrivalled  splendour. 

Thus  we  have  reached  the  most  recent  phase  of  the 
drama  before  speaking  a  single  word  of  the  original 
pantomime,  a  proof  how  far-reaching  and  important  it 
is  to  settle  its  character,  of  which  we  are  now  going  to 
give  a  few  examples. 

The  dances  of  the  Damaras  consist  mostl\-  of  mimic 
representations  of  the  movements  of  oxen  and  sheep. 
The  dancers  accompany  their  gesticulations  by  monoto- 
nous tunes,  and  keep  time  by  clapping  the  hands  and 
striking  the  ground  with  their  feet.^  In  the  Ngumbi 
forest  in  Africa  the  gorilla  is  the  object  of  mimic  repre- 
sentations, during  which  an  iron  bell  is  rung  and  a  hoarse 
rattle  mingled  with  the  other  sounds.  Then  the  measure 
grows  quicker  and  quicker,  a  drum  is  beaten,  sticks 
thundered  on  the  log,  until  the  whole  hunting  and  rolling 
of  the  gorilla  is  performed  with  great  truth  to  nature.- 

Among  the  Fans,  who  are  cannibals,  the  dancers  are 
fond  of  all  sorts  of  mummery,  in  which  a  man  disguises 
himself  as  any  animal  by  putting  on  some  cloth  and 
mats,  performing  all  kinds  of  grotesque  movements  amidst 
the  jubilating  shouts  of  his  fellow-tribesmen.^  Such 
mummeries  as  occur  on  all  the  continents  seem  to  be 
the  origin  of  our  masques,  which  are  in  great  favour  with 
savages  and  occur  in  very  characteristic  shapes.  Thus 
the  primitive  animal  pantomime  is  in  some  sense  the 
original  of  our  fancy-dress  balls.  Another  kind  of  panto- 
mimes is  that  in  which  the  dancers  closely  imitate  all  the 
movements  they  are  accustomed  to  perform  in  a  real  war, 
as  do  the  natives  of  Mahenge.*     These  representations  are 


C.  J.  Andersson,  I.  c,  p.  230.     -  Reade,  Sav.  Afr.,  p.  195. 

Lenz,  /.  c,  p.  88.  ^Thomson,  Centr.  Afy.  Lak.,  i.  p.  186. 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME.  217 

evidently  based  on  the  principle  of  employino^  that  over- 
flow of  vigour  and  energy  which  is  necessary  for  the 
struggle  of  life  (war,  hunt,  work),  without,  however, 
being  in  appropriate  use  for  a  time.  Mr.  Lander  saw  at 
Katunga  a  pantomimic  performance  in  three  acts.  The 
first  was  a  dance  of  twenty  men  wrapped  up  in  sacks ; 
the  second  represented  the  capture  of  a  boa  constrictor, 
which  was  imitated  by  one  of  the  dancers  as  well  as 
circumstances  permitted  it  ;  the  third,  which  caused  the 
most  laughter,  was  a  caricature  of  the  white  man,  who 
was,  however,  very  badl}-  represented  by  a  white-painted 
dancer.  During  the  "entr'act,"  which  was  very  short, 
there  was  a  concert  of  drums  and  pipes  and  national  songs 
of  the  women,  whose  choruses  were  joined  by  the  w^hole 
people.^ 

In  Australia,  too,  there  are  pantomimic  gestures  con- 
nected with  some  songs  which  are  passed  on  from  per- 
former to  performer,  as  the  song  is  carried  from  tribe  to 
tribe.-  The  aborigines  of  Victoria  have  their  war  dances 
before  and  after  fights,  dances  appropriate  to  occasion  of 
"  making  young  men,"  dances  in  which  the  women  only 
take  part,  and  dances  in  which  the  movements  of  the 
kangaroo,  the  emu,  the  frog,  the  butterfly  are  imitated.^ 
Mr.  B.  Smyth  tells  us  that  the  perceptive  faculties  of  the 
natives  are  very  clear,  and  their  power  of  observation  and 
imitation  sometimes  quite  extraordinary.  Monotonous 
and  harsh  as  their  chants  may  be,  the  natives  are  by  no 
means  unsusceptible  of  the  power  of  music.  The  young 
people  readily  learn  how  to  sing  and  how  to  play  on  in- 
struments.^ The  natives  at  the  Lake  Albert  imitate  in 
their  dances  the  actions  and  movements  of  a  frog,  the 
hunting  of  the  emu,  the  voice  of  a  bird.^ 

The  New  Zealanders,  too,  invariably  accompany  their 

1  Lander,  Rec.  Clapp.,  i.  pp.  116-121.  -  Howitt,  /.  c,  p.  327. 

3  R.  B.  Smyth,  /.  c,  i.  p.  166.  ^  Ibid.,  p.  266. 

•5  G.  F.  Angas,  Savacre  Life,  i.  p.  C3. 


215  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

dances  with  fj^esticulations.  Their  most  exciting  dance  is 
the  war  dance,  performed  before  a  battle  commences 
with  the  purpose  to  excite  their  warriors  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  fury.^  The  dances  of  the  ancient  Tasmanians 
were  imitations  of  animal  movements.- 

The  dance  Hewa  (in  the  South  Sea  Islands)  is  an 
accomplished  pantomime  in  which  the  abduction  of  a  girl 
or  the  birth  of  a  boy  is  represented.^  The  Dyaks  of 
Borneo  have  different  kinds  of  dances  representing  the 
movements  of  animals,  or  a  pantomime  representing  the 
hunting.  All  these  dances  are  opened  with  music,  to 
which  excellent  time  is  kept,  and  not  seldom  concluded  in 
drunkenness.^  One  of  their  pantomimes  represented  a 
sham  fight  in  which  one  of  the  warriors  was  apparently 
killed,  while  the  victor  discovered  too  late  that  he  had 
killed  a  friend,  whereupon  he  showed  unmistakable  signs 
of  regret  and  sorrow.  Suddenly  the  slain  warrior  got  up 
and  began  a  frantic  dance. ■'  Thus  even  in  this  state  of 
culture  there  seems  to  be  a  general  desire  for  the  story 
to  end  well.  The  Papuans  imitate  in  their  dance  the 
minstrelsy  of  birds,  and  always  like  to  display  some 
s}-mmetry  in  their  movements.  Of  two  dancers  standing 
next  to  each  other,  the  one  is  alwa}s  anxious  to  make  the 
same  movement  with  the  right  leg  or  arm  which  the  other 
is  performing  with  the  left.^ 

The  dances  of  the  Chukchi  closely  resemble  those  of 
the  Indians.  The  men  dance  quite  nude,  having  only 
the  feet  covered  and  the  hair  ornamented  with  feathers. 
Their  movements  consist  of  wild  imitations  of  hunt  and 
fight.  The  women  sing  to  this  and  again  imitate  the 
movements  of  their  own  daily  occupations,  such  as  carry- 
ing water,  collecting:  berries.     Thus  these  dances  become 


'  Angas,  Savage  Life,  i.  pp.  328-329.  -  Bonwick,  /.  c,  p.  35. 

■'  Meinicke,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  189.  ■•  Boyle,  /.  c,  p.  82  scq. 

^  St.  John,  /.  c,  i.  p.  55.  «  Schelling,  /.  c. 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME.  219 

natural  mimic  ballets.^  The  dances  of  the  Kamchadales  are 
pantomimic,  while  the  music  to  them  is  sung  with  always 
increasing  passion.  The  rhythm  is  a  system  of  six  trochees 
(bachia-a).-  The  fish-Tunguses  have  the  same  rhythm 
but  without  the  division  into  strophes.  With  unvaried 
monotony  it  is  repeated  to  perfect  exhaustion.  The 
Ostiaks  on  the  Ob  (main  river  of  W.  Siberia)  have  similar 
dances  at  their  religious  feasts,  whence  Mr.  Swan  concludes 
that  a  religious  purpose  must  have  formerly  existed  in  the 
dances  of  the  Kamchadales  as  well. 

Besides  these  dances  of  the  Kamchadales  Mr.  Langs- 
dorf  mentions  the  sea-dog  dance  and  the  bear  dance,  at 
which  they  go  from  the  gentlest,  softest  motion  of  the 
head  and  shoulders  to  the  most  violent  motions  of  the 
whole  body.  Mr.  Lesseps  mentions  the  partridge  dance. 
Of  course  they  are  all  accompanied  with  music,  and  it  is 
almost  painful  to  see  with  what  great  exertion,  especially 
of  the  lungs,  they  are  carried  on,^  Mr.  Krebs  saw  similar 
dances  on  the  Island  of  Spierken  (Kurile  group,  south  of 
Kamchatka,  formerly  belonging  to  Russia,  since  1875  to 
Japan).     The  inhabitants  are  Ainus.* 

The  dances  and  games  of  the  Indians  in  California 
represent  scenes  of  war,  hunting,  and  private  life.''  In 
the  Rocky  Mountains  the  natives  have  the  calumet 
dance,  lasting  from  two  to  three  days  and  always  per- 
formed with  the  expectation  of  receiving  presents  ;  another 
dance  represents  the  discovering  of  the  enemy  ;  again, 
others  are  repeatedly  described  by  travellers  as  the  bear 
dance,  beggar  dance,  bison  dance, ^  ox  dance,  sun  dance. '^ 
Speaking  of  the  Sioux  Indians  Mr.  Keating  mentions  the 
dog  dance  and  the  Chippewa  scalp  dance,  of  which  the 

^  Merck,  /.  c,  p.  65.  -  Erman,  /.  c,  i.  3,  p.  i8g. 

•'  Lesseps,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  105-106  ;  Langsdorf,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  302. 
*  Krebs,  /.  c,  pp.  379-391.  ^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  i.  p.  393. 

^  Long,  Exp.  Rock.  M.,  i.  pp.  332-337. 
"  Perrin  du  Lac,  /.  c,  pp.  120-123. 


220  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC, 

music  is  low  and  melancholic  but  not  unpleasant.  The 
performers  stand  in  a  circle  each  with  the  wing  of  a  bird 
in  his  hand  (origin  of  the  fan  ?),  with  which  he  beats 
time  on  his  gun,  arrow,  or  something  that  would  give  a 
sound. ^  The  Indians  in  Guiana  also  have  animal  dances 
at  which  they  keep  up  a  monotonous  chant,  ever}-  dancer 
stamping  the  ground  in  strict  time  with  the  others.-  As 
they  danced  they  uttered  alternate  cries  which  resembled 
the  note  of  a  certain  bird  often  heard  in  the  forests.  Two 
pieces  of  wood,  rudely  carved,  had  to  resemble  the  bird 
itself,  others  to  represent  infants.^ 

It  is  no  doubt  a  sign  of  further  progress  in  those  per- 
formances when  the  spoken  word  comes  to  the  aid  of  the 
representation,  and  from  this  moment  we  may  speak  of 
the  drama  proper. 

At  Zleetun  (or  Zuletin,  or  Ziliten,  or  Sliten,  North 
Africa)  Mr.  Lyon  heard  the  negro  women  singing  a 
national  song  in  a  chorus  while  pounding  wheat,  always 
in  time  with  the  music.  One  of  the  songs,  sung  by  three 
girls,  dealt  with  the  return  of  the  warriors,  when  suddenly 
they  beat  without  measure  and  sang  as  if  for  one  who  was 
dead,  endeavouring  to  comfort  the  girl  who  was  supposed 
to  have  lost  her  lover.  Then  a  goat  was  supposed  to  be 
killed  and  the  entrails  examined  until  a  happy  sign  was 
discovered  which  indicated  that  the  lost  lover  died  nobly. 
They  then  resumed  their  pestles,  winding  up  with  a 
beautiful  chorus.  The  master  of  the  girls,  however, 
forbade  their  singing  any  more,  saying  it  was  unholy  and 
displeasing  to  their  Lord  Mohammed,  the  Prophet  of  God.* 

The  dramatic  narratives  of  the  negroes  are  on  the  whole 
remarkable.  So  true  to  nature  is  their  action  that  they 
even  indicate  the  space  of  time  which  elapsed  between  two 

^  Keating,  /.  c,  i.  p.  438,  with  mus.  example. 
-  Im  Thurn,  /.  c,  p.  309. 
^  Brett,  /.  c,  pp.  154-156. 
^  Lyon,  /.  c,  p.  336. 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME.  221 

events  by  producing  a  sound  like  r-r-r-r}  In  ancient  Egypt 
there  was,  however,  no  pubHc  show  which  would  resemble 
a  theatre,  nor  pantomimic  exhibitions  nor  scenic  representa- 
tion. The  priests  succeeded  in  forbidding  this  noblest  and 
highest  outcome  of  the  human  mind  in  order  to  use  the 
mere  rudiments  of  art  for  their  own  religious  purposes. 
In  consequence  of  the  absence  of  a  drama  in  Egypt,  Mr, 
Wilkinson  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  stage  was  a 
purely  Greek  invention,  and  the  pantomime  a  Roman. ^  I 
think  that  the  ethnologicah  examples  sufficiently  prove  a 
much  earlier  origin. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  forms  of  a  primitive  drama 
is  the  Australian  corrobberree.  The  performers  decorate 
themselves  in  some  grotesque  style,  marking  each  rib  by 
a  broad  stripe  of  white  paint  over  the  black  skin,  thus 
making  the  chorus  look  like  a  number  of  skeletons  "  endued 
with  life  by  magic  powers  ".^ 

The  festivities  began  by  the  dancers  intoning  a  plain- 
tive song,  to  which  the  old  men  and  women  joined  in  at 
times.  The  words  to  this  were  simply:  "  Junger  a  bia, 
mati,  mati,"  which  they  always  repeated.  They  com- 
menced in  a  loud,  shrill  tone,  gradually  sinking  in  pitch 
and  decreasing  in  force  until  the  tones  were  so  soft  as  to 
be  scarcely  distinguishable  from  a  gentle  breath  of  air  that 
rustled  in  the  bush.  During  the  song  the  dancers  remained 
in  a  bent  position,  and  marked  the  time  with  their  feet, 
lifting  them  from  the  ground  in  short  movements.  At  the 
same  time  plucking  the  long  ends  of  their  beards,  they 
suddenly  changed  the  music  to  a  loud  "ha  hei,  ha  hei," 
striking  their  spears  and  wameras  against  each  other  and 
stamping  the  ground  vigorously  with  their  feet.  Then 
they  got  up  with  a  sudden  jerk,  shouting  a  terrific  "  garra 
wai  ".    Again  they  assumed  the  first  motion,  but  in  twice  as. 

1  M.  Buchner,  Kiiust  dcr  Ncgcr,  p.  13- 
-Wilkinson,  /.  c,  i.  p.  455. 
'■'Illustr.  Loud.  News,  1863  (illustr.). 


222  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

quick  time  ;  now  the  whole  row  moved  sideways  up  and 
down,  shoulder  on  shoulder  ;  now  they  danced  in  a  circle, 
all  with  the  same  music  and  the  same  stamping  of  feet,^ 

In  another  corrobberree,  which  Mr.  Lumholtz  saw, 
the  music  was  performed  by  one  man  only,  the  others 
dancing  in  a  chorus.  A  single  woman  was  allowed  to  take 
part  in  dancing,  which  was  considered  a  great  honour  to 
her.  The  music,  in  strict  time  with  the  movements,  was 
quick  and  not  very  melancholy.  The  monotonous  clattering, 
the  hollow  accompaniment  of  the  women,  the  grunting  of 
the  male  dancers  and  the  heavy  footfall  of  the  men,  reminded 
Mr.  Lumholtz,  especially  when  he  was  some  distance  away 
from  the  scene,  of  a  steam  engine  at  work.  While  all  took 
great  pleasure  in  the  performance,  the  musician  only  appa- 
rently had  no  interest  in  what  was  going  on,  and,  beating 
time,  he  sang  with  his  hoarse  tenor  voice  without  looking 
up.  He  had  already  been  watching  the  exercises  for  weeks, 
and  knew  them  all  by  heart ;  but  even  he  sometimes  seemed 
to  be  amused."  However  primitive  a  corrobberree  may 
appear  to  us,  it  is  a  well-prepared  and  elaborated  dance, 
which  it  takes  both  time  and  practice  to  excel  in.'^ 

Speaking  of  the  tribes  on  Mary  River  or  of  the  Bunja 
Bunja  Country,  Mr.  Edward  Curr  mentions  two  kinds  of 
corrobberree,  the  dramatic  and  the  lyric.  The  intelli- 
gence that  a  new  corrobberree  had  been  composed  was 
received  with  pleasurable  excitement  by  the  surrounding 
tribes.  The  poet  having  introduced  his  work  to  the  neigh- 
bouring tribes,  these  in  turn  invited  their  allies  to  witness 
it  and  aid  in  the  performance.  In  this  manner  a  corrob- 
berree travelled,  and  was  sung  with  great  enthusiasm 
where  not  a  word  of  it  was  intelligible.  The  story  of  the 
drama  appears  to  have  been  exceedingly  short  and  simple, 
and  rarelv  free    from  obscenitv.      Besides,  there  was  an 


Browne,  /.  c,  p.  445.  -  Lumholtz,  /.  c,  p.  240. 

^  Sturt,  /.  c,  i.  p.  84. 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME.  223 

amazing  simultaneousness  of  action,  and  excellent  time 
was  beaten  by  the  women. 

The  corrobberree  music — says  Curr— is  much  like  a 
chant.  A  string  of  words  often  runs  to  the  one  note.  All 
the  parts  are  variations  of  one  tune,  sung  in  different  kinds 
of  time,  and  at  various  rates  of  speed.  There  is  a  peculiar 
tendency  to  slide  in  semitones  from  one  key  into  another, 
and  the  effect  of  the  music  is  almost  invariabh^  minor.  A 
favourite  practice  is  to  raise  the  pitch  suddenly  an  octave, 
and  in  order  to  effect  this  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  allow 
it  to  slide  to  a  low  pitch  before.  Instead  of  intimating 
the  conclusion  of  one  part  of  the  piece  by  two  or  three  \-ells, 
as  the  singers  do  at  times,  a  more  musical  practice  is  often 
followed  of  trilling  the  sound  of  r  at  a  high  pitch.^ 

The  Kuri  dance  is  another  kind  of  primitive  drama. 
Mr.  Angas  described  one  that  was  performed  by  five 
different  classes  of  actors  :  -  i.  A  body  of  about  twenty-five 
young  men,  including  five  or  six  boys,  the  dancers.  2.  Two 
groups  of  women,  merely  taking  the  part  of  supernum- 
eraries, and  beating  time  with  their  feet  during  the  whole 
performance.  3.  Two  remarkable  characters  of  the  play. 
4.  A  performer  distinguished  by  a  long  spear.  5.  Two 
singers — two  elderly  men  in  their  usual  habiliments. 

The  man  in  group  four  commenced  a  part  which  called 
forth  unbounded  applause  ;  with  his  head  and  body  inclined 
on  one  side,  his  spear  and  feathers  behind  his  back,  standing 
on  the  left  leg,  he  beat  time  with  the  right  foot,  twitching 
his  body  and  eyes,  and  stamping  with  the  greatest  precision ; 
he  remained  a  few  minutes  in  this  position,  and  then  sud- 
denly turned  round,  stood  on  his  right  leg,  and  did  the 
same  over  with  his  left  foot. 

Mr.  Bonwick  heard  at  Port  Jackson  what  he  called 
a   "  speaking    pantomime " ;    it  dealt    with   the   courtship 

^  Curr,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  167  ;  other  descriptions  of  corrobberrees  by  G.  F. 
Angas,  Sav.  Life,   i.   p.    102. 

-Angas,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  103-107. 


224  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

between  the  sexes,  and  was  performed  with  very  expressive 
actions.^ 

On  Cook's  second  voyage  Mr.  Foster  saw  a  "  comic 
opera  "  on  the  Society  Islands,  the  first  act  of  which  con- 
cluded with  a  burlesque  beating  of  three  of  the  participants."' 
The  performance  of  the  Hurra,  the  festival  dances  on 
0-Waihi,  called  forth  Mr.  Chamisso's  admiration.  The 
singing  of  the  dancers,  accompanied  by  the  drum,  begins 
slowly  and  softly,  gradually  quickening  and  increasing, while 
the  dancers  proceed  and  play  in  a  more  lively  manner.^  At 
Gresek  in  Java  Mr.  Tombe  saw  a  Malayan  comedy.  "  It 
was  precisely  what  we  call  a  Chinese  shadow-play"  and 
had  to  represent  a  war.  The  music  to  it  consisted  of 
kettle-drums,  gom-goms,  and  the  Javese  violoncello,  while 
the  manager  and  thirty  young  dancing  girls  sang  the 
praise  of  the  emperor  and  his  ancestors.*  Mrs.  Ida 
Pfeiffer  witnessed  at  Bandong  the  performance  of  a  Javese 
pantomime  in  three  movements,  representing  a  fight, 
where  the  noisy  and  discordant  music  changed  to  a  soft, 
plaintive  melody  as  soon  as  one  party  was  defeated. 
The  whole  performance  was  really  pretty  and  expressive. 
The  dancers  kept  their  eyes  constantly  fixed  on  the 
ground,  as  is  customary  among  most  non-European 
nations,  to   express  profound  respect  for  the  spectators.'* 

The  most  complete  description  of  the  Javese  national 
drama  is  given  by  Mr.  Raffles,  who  reports  of  two  different 
kinds  of  it,  the  "  topeng  "  (characters  represented  by  men), 
and  the  "  wayang "  (represented  by  "shadows").  In 
general  the  performers  have  only  to  "  suit  the  action  to 
the  words,"  which  are  spoken  by  the  "dalang,"  the  manager 
of  the  entertainment.  The  gamelan  accompanies  the 
piece  and  varies  in  expression  according  to  the  nature  of 
the   action   or  the   kind   of  emotion   to   be   excited.     The 

^  Bonwick,  /.  c,  p.  33.                              -  Elso.n,  /.  c,  p.. 247. 
•*  Chamisso,  /.  c,  p.  152.                         .■*  Tombe,  /,  c,  p..  58. 
^  I.  Pfeiffer,  /.  c,  i.  p.-  212 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME.  225 

whole  of  the  performance  has  more  the  character  of  a 
ballet  than  of  a  regular  dramatic  exhibition.^ 

In  Sumatra  the  custom  prevails  during  their  dances 
that  a  young  lady  ("gadis")  sometimes  rises  and,  with 
her  back  to  the  audience,  begins  a  tender  song  which  is 
soon  answered  by  one  of  the  "  bujangs  "  in  company. 
Professed  story-tellers  are  sometimes  raised  on  a  little 
stage  and  attract  the  attention  of  the  audience  by  buffoonery, 
or  mimicry,  and  keep  the  company  in  laughter  all  night 
long.  The  young  men  frequent  these  assemblies  in  order 
to  look  out  for  wives,  and  Mr.  Marsden  remarks :  "  The 
lasses  set  themselves  off  to  the  best  advantage  ".-  From 
this  we  may  see  how  near  the  Javans  come  to  European 
civilisation. 

A  savage  opera  of  the  more  advanced  kind  is  performed 
by  the  Khyongthas,  wild  tribes  in  South  Eastern  India.^ 
The  performers,  male  and  female,  each  had  a  cigar,  which, 
at  emotional  passages,  was  stuck  either  behind  the  ear  or 
through  the  pierced  lobe  thereof.  The  instruments  were 
a  "  shawn  "  (a  cross  between  the  clarionet  and  the 
trumpet),  "a  battalion  of  drums"  tuned  up  with  screws 
in  the  most  scientific  style,  and  arranged  in  a  circle  in  the 
middle  of  which  the  player  was  sitting.  The  opera,  a 
happily  ending  love  story,  with  a  "  primo  corifeo  tenore," 
a  grumbling  bass  king,  and  a  romantic  soprano,  was  per- 
formed in  the  most  exact  style.  Mr.  Lewin  really  did 
like  the  music  ;  it  had  distinct  rhythm  and  time,  while 
the  choruses  were  sometimes  very  quaint  and  jolly.  The 
drums,  too,  with  their  different  and  mellow  tones  were 
emplo}-ed  most  judiciously,  varying  in  expression  and 
"  tempo  "    to  suit  the  dramatic  action  of  the  piece. 

The  climax  of  realism  seems  to  be  reached  by  the 
Chinese  drama.  Mr.  Gortz  tells  us  that  one  of  his 
companions  saw  a  performance  where  a  woman  actually 

1  Raffles,  /.  c,  i.  pp.  335  and  469.  -  Marsden,  /.  c,  p.  267. 

•^  Lewin,  /.  c,  p.  156. 

15 


226  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

tore  out  the  heart  of  her  female  rival   and  ate  it  before 
the  very  eyes  of  the  audience.^ 

Speaking  of  the  Aleutian  Islanders  (Indians)  Mr. 
Choris  mentions  a  pantomime  in  which  a  sportsman 
shoots  a  beautiful  bird  ;  it  suddenly  revives,  however,  into 
a  beautiful  woman  with  whom  he  at  once  falls  in  love.'^ 
The  ancient  Nahua,  which  belong  to  some  extent  to  the 
civilised  nations  of  the  Pacific  States,  always  had  great 
preparations  for  the  public  dances  and  dramas,  with  music, 
choirs  and  bands  generally  led  and  instructed  in  many 
rehearsals  by  a  priest.  When  one  set  of  dancers  became 
tired  another  took  its  place,  and  so  the  dance  continued 
through  the  whole  day,  each  song  taking  about  one  hour.^ 
The  drama  scarcely  equalled  the  choral  dance,  although 
in  this  respect,  too,  the  Nahuas  showed  considerable  ad- 
vancement. The  play  generally  had  the  character  of  a 
burlesque.  The  performers  mostly  wore  masks  of  wood 
or  were  disguised  as  animals.*  Singers  appeared  on  the 
stage,  but  no  instrumental  music  is  mentioned.  The 
ancient  writers  unite  in  praising  the  perfect  unison  and 
good  time  observed  by  the  singers  both  in  solo  and 
quartette,  and  they  mention  particularly  the  little  boys 
of  from  four  to  eight  years  of  age  who  rendered  the  soprano 
in  a  manner  that  reflected  great  credit  on  the  training  of 
their  priestly  tutors.  Each  temple,  and  many  noblemen, 
kept  choirs  and  bands  of  professional  musicians  usually 
led  by  a  priest,  who  composed  odes  appropriate  to  everv 
occasion.  The  art  of  music  was  under  royal  protection, 
and  singers  as  well  as  musicians  were  exempt  from 
taxation  ;  an  academy  of  science  and  music  was  founded 
where  the  allied  Kings  of  Mexico,  Tezcuco,  and  Tlacopan 
presided  and  distributed  prizes  to  the  successful  com- 
petitors.^ 

^  Gortz,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  60.  -  Choris,  /.  c,  p.  9. 

^Bancroft,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  289.  ^  Ibid.,  p.  291. 

^  Ibid.,  ii.  p.  294,  with  bibliography  on  mu^ic  of  ancient  Mexico, 
note    24. 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME.  227 

The  Indian  singer  often  acts  while  he  sings  or  dances, 
representing  at  the^  same  time  a  certain  scene  from  life. 
Sproat  describes  one  of  those  dances,  where  a  man  appears 
with  his  arms  tied  behind  his  back  with  long  cords,  the 
ends  of  which  are  held  by  other  natives,  who  drive  him 
about.  The  spectators  sing  and  beat  time  on  their  wooden 
dishes  and  bearskin  drums.  Suddenly  the  chief  appears, 
and  plunges  his  knife  into  the  runner's  back.  Another 
blow  is  given,  a  third  one,  until  the  blood  flows  down  his 
back,  and  the  victim  falls  prostrate  and  lifeless.  Mr. 
Sproat  adds  he  never  saw  acting  more  true  to  the  life. 
And  yet  the  blood  was  only  a  mixture  of  red  gum,  resin,  oil 
and  water,  the  same  that  was  used  in  colouring  the  inside 
of  canoes.^  In  ancient  Mexico  and  in  Guatemala  there 
were  ballets  at  which  rarely  less  than  400  people,  but 
sometimes  more  than  2000,  performed.^  During  the 
great  feast  of  Toxcatl  the  music  was  supplied  by  a  party 
of  unseen  musicians,  who  occupied  one  of  the  temple 
buildings.^  The  Maya  nations  in  Central  America  had 
dramatic  performances  under  the  leadership  of  one  who 
was  called  "  holpop,"  or  master  of  ceremonies.  Women 
were  not  allowed  to  take  part  in  the  mummeries,  and  the 
plays  had  a  historical  character  with  songs  in  the  form  of 
ballads  founded  upon  local  traditions  and  legendary  tales."* 

Messrs.  Spix  and  Martius  tell  us  of  a  pantomimic  scene 
of  the  Coroados  in  Brazil,  which  was  a  kind  of  lamenta- 
tion, saying:  "They  had  attempted  to  pluck  a  flower  from  a 
tree,  but  had  fallen  down  "'.  The  scene  is  interpreted  by 
the  above  authors  as  the  loss  of  Paradise.^ 

Of  a  peculiar  character  are  the  scenes  in  those  theatres 
where  the  audience  consists   of  white   and  black,  where 

^  Sproat,  /.  c,  pp.  66,  67. 

-  Brasseur,  I.  c,  p.  10,  with  complete  descriptions  of  those  representa- 
tions and  musical  examples. 

^Bancroft,  /.  c,  iii.  p.  427.  *Ibid.,  ii.  p.  712. 

^  Spix  and  Martius,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  238. 


228  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

civilisation  and  originality  each  react  in  its  own  way  on 
the  impression  of  the  drama.  At  Quito,  Indians  with  their 
wives  and  babies,  and  negroes  were  admitted  to  the  theatre, 
together  with  a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  in  evening 
dress.  At  the  most  important  moments  the  audience,  in 
its  excitement,  rose  up  and  stood  on  the  benches.  In  one 
of  the  tricks  a  pistol  was  fired,  and  then  all  the  babies  set 
up  a  squall  simultaneously,  so  that  the  actors  had  to  stop 
until  the  mothers  could  manage  to  hush  the  babies  to  sleep 
again. ^  This  is  perhaps  a  counterpart  to  Mr.  Schlagint- 
weit's  narrative  of  a  representation  in  California,  where 
the  performance  was  interrupted  by  babies'  cries,  in  conse- 
quence of  which  the  male  audience — there  were  very  few 
females  there  at  that  time — commanded  the  actors,  not  the 
babies,  to  be  silent.^ 

It  has  often  been  asked  why  our  dramatic  performances 
frequently  assume  a  tragic  character,  although  we  are  at 
liberty  to  choose  any  other — perhaps  more  satisfactory — 
subject.  A  desire  for  tragical  events,  however,  seems  to 
be  deeply  rooted  in  human  nature,  and  always  points  to  a 
freshness  and  originality  of  feeling  which,  not  being  entirely 
used  up  in  every-day  life,  still  press  to  the  surface  to  unfold 
their  full  emotional  vigour  in  the  most  precious  and  noblest 
part  of  our  mental  life — in  our  fancy.  Only  he,  whose  life 
itself  is  a  mechanism  or  a  tragedy,  has  no  need  for  serious 
play  of  fancy.  Savages  do  not  yet  seem  to  be  in  this  state 
of  mental  decadence.  Mr.  Buchner  once  said  :  "  Every- 
where among  the  so-called  savages  we  come  across  the 
custom  to  allow  oneself  to  be  shuddered  at  a  sort  of 
devil  ".^  Among  the  women  of  the  Maoris  the  desire  for 
"fear  and  dread" — the  two  dramatical  requirements  of 
Aristotle — seems  to  be  still  more  prevalent.     Their  chief 


^  I.  Pfeiffer,  Second  Voyage,  ii.  p.  226. 
-  Schlagintweit,  /.  c,  pp.  303-304. 
*  Buchner,  Kamcriin,  I.  c,  p.  26. 


PRIMITIVE    DRAMA    AND    PANTOMIME,  22g 

amusement  is  the  "tangi,"  or  crying.  The  ladies  do  it 
in  the  most  affecting  way,  tears  are  shed,  hands  are  wrung, 
and  the  most  heart-rending  cries  excite  the  sympathy  of 
the  company.  Yet  it  is  but  a  "  mockery  of  woe  ".^  It  is 
scarcely  possible  to  express  a  strong  psychological  impulse 
in  a  more  simple  and  natural  way. 

1  Taylor,  R.,  /.  c,  p.  349. 


CHAPTER   IX. 


ON  THE   ORIGIN  OF   MUSIC. 


We  have  been  told  until  tired  of  hearing  it,  that  the  one 
essential  feature  in  primitive  music  was  rhythm,  melody 
being  of  accessory  importance.  We  do  not  meet  with  a 
single  instance  among  savages  of  melody,  fixed  according 
to  musical  principles  ;  melodic  cadences,  where  they  occur, 
sei*ve  only  as  signals,  or  as  a  convenient  accompaniment 
to  certain  activities,  such  as  rowing,  towing,  or  fighting. 
Even  among  savage  tribes  where  some  songs  have  in 
course  of  time  become  traditional,  words  and  melody  are 
varied  after  a  few  repetitions  by  different  singers,  or  even 
by  the  same  performer.  Rhythm,  taken  in  a  general  sense 
to  include  "keeping  in  time,"  is  the  essence  in  music,  in 
its  simplest  form  as  well  as  in  the  most  skilfully  elaborated 
fugues  of  modern  composers.  To  recall  a  tune  the  rhythm 
must  be  revived  first,  and  the  melody  will  easily  be  re- 
called. The  latter  may  be  suggested  by  the  former,  but 
never  vice  versa.  Completely  to  understand  a  musical 
work  ceases  to  be  difficult  when  once  its  rhythmical 
arrangement  is  mastered ;  and  it  is  through  rhythmical 
performance  and  rhythmical  susceptibility  that  musical 
effects  are  produced  and  perceived.  From  these  several 
data  I  conclude  that  the  origin  of  music  must  be  sought 
in  a  rhythmical  impulse  in  man.  I  do  not  mean  that 
musical  effects  consist  in  rhythmical  movement  as  such  ; 
innumerable  ideas  and  feelings  become  associated  with 
it,  and  give  rise  to  those  emotions  which  we  on  hearing  it 
experience. 

(230) 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  23I 

The  formalistic  principle  in  aesthetics,  according  to 
which  feehngs  are  no  essential  feature  in  "  the  beautiful," 
has  recently  been  excellently  refuted  by  Sir  John  Stainer, 
who  said  :  Music  exists  only  inside  the  perceiving  subject 
(only  the  air-waves  exist  outside  of  it,  but  they  become 
music  only  in  a  perceiving  mind),  therefore  it  cannot  be 
beautiful  in  itself,  because  it  has  "  no  objective  reality  or 
separate  existence  ".  Stainer  justly  calls  the  theory  of 
the  "  self-subsistent  form  of  the  beautiful,"  when  applied 
to  music,  "■  sheer  nonsense  '\^ 

If  it  be  asked  whence  the  sense  of  rhythm  arises,  I 
answer,  from  the  general  appetite  for  exercise.  That  this 
desire  occurs  in  rhythmical  form  is  due  to  sociological 
as  well  as  psychological  conditions.  On  the  one  hand, 
there  is  the  social  character  of  primitive  music,  compel- 
ling a  number  of  performers  to  act  in  concert.  On  the 
other,  our  perception  of  time-relations  involves  a  process 
of  intellection,  the  importance  of  which  has  been  pointed 
out  by  Prof.  Sully,  and  which  I  cannot  better  describe  than 
in  his  own  words:  "This  perception  of  successive  or 
time-ordered  impressions  is  something  more  than  a  succes- 
sion of  impressions  or  perceptions.  It  involves  a  subse- 
quent act  of  reflection,  by  means  of  which  the  mind  is  able 
at  the  same  time  to  comprehend  them  as  a  whole."  ^ 
Now  every  product  which  is  of  the  intellect  and  appeals  to 
the  intellect  must  contain  all  the  particulars  which  follow 
from  reflection  and  render  it  possible.  And  since  music  is 
produced  not  merely  as  an  auditory  impression  and  ex- 
pression, but  also  in  order  to  evoke  reflection,  it  must 
contain  the  qualities  above  alluded  to,  viz.,  time-order  and 
rhythm.  Such  being  the  grounds  for  rhythmical  expression 
the  question  still  remains  to  be  answered:  Whence  does  the 
general  desire  for  exercise  arise  ?  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's 
theory  affords  the  most  valid  explanation.     It  is  the  sur- 

1  Stainer,  Music  in  its  Relat.,  etc.,  p.  28. 
-  Outlines  of  Psychology,  p.  206. 


232  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

plus  vigour  in  more  highly  evolved  organisms,  exceeding 
what  is  required  for  immediate  needs,  in  which  play  of  all 
kinds  takes  it  rise  ;  manifesting  itself  by  way  of  imitation 
or  repetition  of  all  those  efforts  and  exertions  which  were 
essential  to  the  maintenance  of  life  {e.g.,  the  war-dance).^ 
i\nd  it  has,  moreover,  been  demonstrated  by  ethnological 
research  that  to  bring  about  bodily  fatigue  through  the 
manifestation  of  energy  in  a  perpetually-increasing  ratio 
up  to  the  last  degree  of  lassitude  is  an  indispensable 
feature  of  primitive  art."' 

It  may  be  objected  that  a  mere  craving  for  rh}thm  is 
far  from  amounting  to  a  desire  for  tones  and  melody,  and 
that,  therefore,  the  question,  as  to  what  gives  rise  to  our 
discriminative  pleasure  in  musical  intervals,  is  not  }-et  satis- 
factorily answered.  The  origin  of  the  significance  of 
intervals  and  our  appreciation  of  them  is  indeed  one  of 
the  utmost  importance  for  our  present  purpose.  A  simple 
example,  however,  will  teach  us  that  rhythm  and  sonant 
rhythm  coincide.  Try  to  play  first  on  a  stretched,  and  then 
on  an  unstretched,  drum  or  kettledrum,  such  as  savages  use, 
and  you  will  see  that  rhythm  brings  us  in  and  by  itself  to 
sound    and    certain    tones,    owing   to    the    fact    that    the 

1  Psychology,  Jj  534. 

-  It  is  curious,  that  whereas  Mr.  Spencer  and  all  the  other  English 
writers  who  treat  of  the  so-called  Spidtricb  (play-impulse),  e.g.,  Messrs. 
Sully  and  Grant  Allen,  regard  it  as  an  entirely  German  idea,  in  Germany 
it  has  always  been  ascribed  to  English  theorists.  It  did  indeed  find 
embodiment  in  the  writings  of  Schiller,  but  was,  in  my  opinion,  smothered 
rather  than  brought  to  light  by  the  philosophical  jargon  which  he  learned 
from  Kant,  and  by  his  own  obscure  metaphysical  style.  He  ran  into  a  great 
labyrinth  of  metaphysic,  whence  nobody  can  find  the  way  out — nor  could 
the  author  himself,  I  should  suppose.  Hence  the  theory  remained  unheeded, 
though  committed  to  writing  nearly  a  century  ago.  Put  in  our  times  into 
intelligible  form  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  it  has  nothing  in  common  with  its 
earlier  presentment  beyond  the  name,  the  grounds  being  quite  different. 
But  just  as  Schiller  was  inspired  by  Pope  and  Addison  in  his  Ainiiutli  nnd 
Wi'irdc  and  Bricfc  ubcr  die  dsthetische  Erziehttng  des  Menscheii,  he  likewise 
found  approximations  to  the  Spicltrieb  theory  in  Home's  Elements  of 
Criticism,  ch.  v.  (see  Zimmermann's  Geschichte  dcr  Aesthctik). 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  233 

rhythmical  movement  becomes  much  more  distinct  and 
better-marked  on  the  former,  than  on  the  latter,  instru- 
ment. Hence  it  came  about  that  men  did  not  stop  at 
simply  striking  on  deerskins  as  they  used  to  do  in  primitive 
times,  but  proceeded  to  stretch  them  tirst,  i.e.,  to  perform 
on  drums  and  kettledrums.  The  same  implicit  principle 
prompted  the  custom,  in  grammar-schools  on  the  conti- 
nent, of  teaching  the  rhythms  of  classic  poetry  in  a  kind 
of  chant,  not  of  course  for  musical  purposes,  but  simply 
because  the  rhythms  were  rendered  much  more  distinct 
when  intoned.  Perhaps  no  other  illustration  shows  so 
well  how  a  rhythmical  design,  in  and  by  itself,  brings  us 
to  musical  tones,  and,  by  way  of  these,  to  the  appreciation 
of  intervals  and  melody. 

I  not  only  affirm  that  rhythm  is  one  of  the  main  con- 
stituents, and  creates  the  principal  effect,  in  primitive 
music,  a  remark  frequently  made  by  composers  :  I  also 
maintain  that  rhythm  teaches  us  the  appreciation  of 
intervals,  both  as  to  their  order  and  grouping.  An  interval 
as  such  has  no  musical  value  for  us  without  rhythmical 
order  in  time.  Even  animals  recognise  and  utter  intervals, 
but  cannot  make  any  intelligent  use  of  them,  because  they 
do  not  understand  rhythmical  arrangement.  One  of  the 
most  characteristic  signs  of  a  musical  nature  is,  that 
persons  so  endowed  very  often  cannot  hear  any  noise 
periodically  repeated  without  imagining  it  to  be  accom- 
panied by  music ;  besides  which  they  are  much  fonder 
than  unmusical  persons  of  rhythmical  movements.  Again, 
rhythm  of  itself  incites  to  a  continuance  of  rhythmical 
movement,  as  is  shown  in  an  example  given  by  Mr.  Grant 
Allen  :  ^  "  As  we  walk  along  the  road,  we  sometimes  amuse 
ourselves  by  touching  every  post,  treading  upon  every 
second  flag,  or  striking  our  stick  against  every  lamp-post. 
If  for  any  reason  we  are  obliged  to  leave  out  one  of  the 

iP//js.  yEs//i.,  p.  114. 


234  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

series,  or  to  desist  from  want  of  the  objects  in  question,  a 
slight  blank  is  felt,  which  is  very  faintly  unpleasant.  The 
nervous  system  has  put  itself  into  a  position  of  expectancy, 
and  is  ready  for  the  appropriate  discharge  at  the  right 
moment.  If  the  opportunity  for  the  discharge  is  wanting, 
the  gathered  energy  has  to  dissipate  itself  by  other  channels, 
which  involves  a  certain  amount  of  conflict  and  waste." 
Hence  arises  the  craving  for  a  rhythmical  succession  of 
bars  and  periods.^  Their  recurrence  and  aggregate  arrange- 
ment is  much  more  marked  and  can  be  more  easily  under- 
stood by  a  repetition  of  the  same  tones  or  tunes  over  the 
same  rhythmical  periods  ;  moreover,  in  order  to  give  a 
more  pronounced  tone  to  a  rhythmical  period,  higher  notes 
are  used,  lower  notes  marking  a  decreasing  movement,  and 
so  on,  till  we  have  all  the  elements  of  a  complete  melody. 
Thus  we  get  accustomed  to  the  interval  as  such,  and  ap- 
preciate it  more  than  the  rhythm  as  such,  the  former  being 
the  more  impressive  experience.  That  the  development  of 
a  melody  from  detached  notes  is  due  in  the  first  instance  to 
a  certain  rhythmical  movement  is  an  obvious  fact.  De- 
tached notes  do  not  as  such  prompt  to  further  development 
or  variety.  Rhythm  is  the  initiative  force  which  leads  us 
on  to  any  arrangement  of  notes  whatever,  although  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  the  specific  form  assumed  in  any  such 
arrangement  depends  a  good  deal  upon  our  contingent  ideas 
and  feelings.  The  power  exerted  over  us  by  any  rhythmical 
movement  lies  in  its  being  adjusted  to  the  form  in  which 
ideas  and  feelings  succeed  each  other  in  our  mind.  A 
composer  may  give  us  a  direct  imitation  of  some  movement 
of  external  nature  (a  thunderstorm,  a  waterfall,  or  the  like); 
but  the  fact  holds  good  none  the  less,  that  the  effect  pro- 

1  Compare  Guyau,  Esth.,  p.  39  :  "  Le  rhythme  ne  s'explique  lui-meme  que 
par  la  recherche  du  but  et  la  tension  du  toutes  leurs  forces  vers  ce  but 
unique  ;  I'interet  est  excite  par  la  recherche  d'un  but.  L'intelligence  est 
satisfaite,  car  nous  pouvons  calculer  la  proportion  entre  la  grandeur  du  but 
a  atteindre  et  I'effort  depense  "  (p.  40). 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  235 

duced  in  us  even  in  such  cases  is  due  to  our  recognising, 
in  the  intensity,  strength,  velocity,  increase  and  decrease 
of  the  movements,  forms  corresponding  to  the  flow  of  our 
ideas  and  feehngs,  though  the  nature  of  that  flow  depends 
entirely  on  each  individual  psychical  organism. 

I  am  aware  that  I  put  forward  nothing  new  in  the 
assertion,  that  we  easily  connect  an  ascending  or  de- 
scending modulation  with  an  increase  or  decrease  of 
feeling,  but  I  have  always  had  the  impression  that  even 
those  writers  who  appreciate  the  importance  of  rhythm  in 
music  do  not  consider  this  fact  a  sufficient  explanation  to 
account  for  modulation,  or  for  the  pleasure  we  experience 
in  musical  intervals,  but  go  afield  for  a  supplementary  fact. 
This  they  find  in  the  current  modulations  of  speech,  or  in 
the  intervals  used  by  birds  in  their  "  songs,"  by  the  per- 
ception of  which,  they  suppose,  men  have  come  to  take 
pleasure  in  intervals.  I  for  my  part  think  that  Mr.  Spencer's 
general  theory  of  the  origin  of  art  is  entirely  adequate  to 
explain  the  origin  of  music,  and  that  to  adduce  speech  and 
its  modulations  is  not  only  unnecessary,  but  absolutely 
untenable.  Men  do  not  come  to  music  by  way  of  tones, 
but  they  come  to  tones  and  tunes  by  way  of  the  rhythmical 
impulse. 

It  is  as  Guyau  similarly  says  :  "  L'expression  vive  d'un 
sentiment,  quand  nous  en  sommes  temoins,  fait  sans 
doute  monter  en  nous  le  ton  de  ce  sentiment  mais  elle 
fait  aussi  monter  par  sympathie  le  ton  de  tous  les  autres ; 
par  cela  meme  nous  sommes  portes  a  agir  en  tous  sens  ".^ 

To  this  emotional  power  of  rhythm  an  intellectual 
element  must  be  added.  Accent  and  rhythm  (time- 
division)  "associates  a  vague  multitude  of  sounds  into 
a  unity.  This  is  obtained  by  accentuating  one  sound 
especially  out  of  a  number  of  sounds,  thus  giving  them 
a  centre  round  which  the  others  group  themselves."-     "  Le 

1  Guyau,  Estli.,  p.  30,  -  Hupfeld,  /.  c,  pp.  155,  157. 


236  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

rhythme  nous  donne  la  possibilite  de  prevoir  les  sons  de 
nous  y  preparer :  c'est  un  element  connu  introduit  dans 
rinconnu  des  sensations  auditives."  ^  In  one  word,  it  is 
an  intellectual  element  which  the  strict  time-division 
introduces  into  the  sensual  perception  of  sounds.  In  other 
arts  (poetry,  painting,  sculpture),  this  intellectual  element 
is  introduced  by  the  substantial  object  (scene)  which  is  to 
be  represented;  architecture  claims  a  practical  object; 
music  alone  has  its  intellectual  object  in  itself.  Every 
branch  of  art,  it  is  true,  has  an  emotional  origin  ;  but  in 
the  case  of  music  it  is  not  until  the  peculiar  form  of  time- 
division  (bars  and  periods)  is  added  to  the  emotional 
impulse  that  we  are  justified  in  speaking  of  it  as  music 
proper. 

Since  the  above  was  first  written  (Mind,  vol.  xvi.,  No. 
^5'  P-  375^  I  have  found  a  good  explanation  of  the  import- 
ance of  rhythm  in  music  in  Donovan's  book.  I  do  not 
agree,  however,  with  his  conclusion  :  "  Pitch  relationship 
was  from  the  first  step  in  tune  formation  the  chief  forma- 
tive principle  in  the  grouping  of  rhythms".-  I  should 
say  just  the  reverse  :  rhythm  is  the  formative  principle  in 
the  relationship  of  pitch,  the  natural  tie  which  unites  the 
sounds  into  one  group,  and  is  the  cause  of  a  certain  pitch 
being  maintained  throughout  the  whole  group,  thus  facili- 
tating our  perceiving  it  as  one  whole.  Pitch  relationship 
is  of  no  imaginable  importance  if  the  rhythmical  division 
be  not  formed  beforehand."'- 

Another  writer,  Mr.  Crotti,  in  his  Musiconoinia  seems 
to  misinterpret  the  rhythmical  principle  by  tracing  it  to 
Euler's  theory  of  music  being  an  unconscious  counting. 
This  appears  to  be  a  mistake  from  a  psychological  point 
of  view.     Counting  is  only  a  substitute  for  our  remaining 

^  Guyau,  /.  c,  p.  59.  -  Donovan,  From  Lyre  to  Muse,  p.  98. 

^  Compare  C.  H.  Parry  in  Grove's  Diet.,  iv.  p.  605  :  "  Definiteness  of 
any  kind  in  music,  whether  of  figure  or  phrase,  was  first  arrived  at  through 
connection  with  dancing". 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  237 

conscious  of  a  section  of  time  whenever  we  lose  the 
capacity  of  immediately  perceiving  the  time  -  division. 
Countinc^  is  not   the  time-division   itself.^ 

"MUSIC"  IN  THE  ANIMAL  KINGDOM. 

Before  passing  to  the  discussion  of  Darwin's  theory 
let  us  iirst  consider  the  general  character  of  the  (so-called) 
music  in  the  animal  kingdom. 

Among  the  protozoa  no  sounds  are  produced  ;  among 
mollusca  -  and  Crustacea  they  are  very  rare.  Among 
insects  they  are  as  a  rule  confined  to  the  males, ^  with  the 
exception  of  the  Ephippigera,  where  both  sexes  produce 
sounds.  They  do  not  possess  a  true  voice  and  produce 
noises  rather  than  real  tones.  Many  of  them  cannot  be 
directly  perceived  by  us  because  of  the  limits  of  our  organ 
of  hearing.  "  I  am  disposed  to  think,"  says  Lubbock/ 
that  ants  perceive  sounds  which  we  cannot  hear."  On 
the  other  hand,  bees  produce  sounds  for  us  but  seem  to  be 
insensible  to  ours.^  This  want  of  an  organ  of  voice  is  the 
less  remarkable  as  very  few  insects  (only  orthoptera)  have 
an  organ  of  hearing,  viz.  :  gryllida,  ocridida,  orthoptera 
saltatoria.^  Yet  they  attract  the  females  by  producing 
tones.  A  physiological  explanation  of  this  most  curious 
fact  is  given  in  Mr.  Graber's  highly  interesting  experiments. 
While  Forel  thought  ants  were  entirely  deaf,^  Lubbock 
came  to  no  certain  conclusion,  and  Galton's  experiments 

1  I  find  this  difterence  well  explained  in  James'  Psycho!.,  i.  p.  613  : 
"  Time-division  is  an  intuitive  or  immediate  perception,  while  counting  is  a 
rapid  act  of  association  with  numbers  ".  A  mistake  similar  to  Crotti's  is 
still  more  conspicuous  in  Preyer's  paper:  '  der  Tension,'  /.  c. 

-See  example  in  Tennent,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  468-470. 

^Lubbock,  An.  Intcll.,  p.  61.  Compare  also  Landois,  Weismann. 
Simmel,  however,  says,  /.  c,  p.  284 :  "  Bei  den  musikalischen  Insekten 
musiciren  nur  die  Weibchen  "  (?). 

"^  Ants,  Bees,  Wasps,  I.  c,  pp.  222-233. 

^  Ibid.,  p.  290,  and  Preyer,  Grenz.,  d.  Tonwahrn,  p.  24. 

^  C.  Vogt,  I.  c.,  i.  p.  533.  "  Forel,  Foiirmis  dc  la  Suisse. 


238  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

on  insects'  hearing  were  without  result/  Graber  proved 
that  insects — those  hving  in  the  air  as  well  as  those  living 
in  water — react  on  sound-impression  and  run  away  in 
consequence.  His  experiments  further  proved  that  this 
reaction  was  a  conscious  one,  not  merely  reflex,  as  the 
insects  got  used  to  the  sound  in  a  comparatively  short 
time.  It  w^as  remarkable  that  with  blatta  germanica, 
or  corixa,  the  reaction  consisted  in  a  movement  of  flight, 
while  with  the  orthoptera  saltatoria  the  result  was  an 
approaching  towards  the  sound  as  in  response  to  the  call 
of  the  males.  It  has  been  said  that  the  sensation  of 
of  sounds  among  insects  was  that  of  a  mere  touching, 
whereby  the  periodical  air-waves  were  felt  but  not  dis- 
tinguished as  a  peculiar  sense  of  hearing  from  the  sensa- 
tion of  touch  in  general  (Bonnet,  Haeckel,  Mach).  This 
presumption  proved  to  be  entirely  unfounded,  while  all 
circumstances  under  which  Graber's  experiments  were 
made,  and  especially  the  delicacy  of  the  sensation,  pointed 
to  its  specific  character  similar  to  our  hearing.-  Insects 
may  not  hear  exactly  as  we  do,^  but  they  do  possess  a 
peculiar  sense  for  receiving  sounds  different  from  all 
the  other  sensations.  This  Graber  proved  by  sounding 
a  bell  outside  a  glass  basin  containing  water,  into  which 
the  sound  was  transmitted  along  a  little  ivory  stick  with 
a  plate  at  the  end,  a  distance  of  two  inches  from  the 
corixa.  The  insect  immediately  rushed  off.  If,  however, 
with  this  stick  water-waves  only  were  produced  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  corixa  they  seemed  to  enjoy  the 
undulatory  movement  without  voluntarily  moving  in  any 
wav.'*  The  organ  by  which  they  perceive  the  sounds  is 
what  Graber  calls  "die  chordotonalen  Sinnesorgane,"  i.e., 
nerve-ends,  similar  to  the  auditory  hairs  but  made  tense 
like  strings  of  a  piano.  The  insects  may  perceive  sound- 
stimuli    even    without    head    and    brain,    their    acoustic 

1  Galton,  Ltqiiir.,  pp.  39-40.  -Graber,  /.  c,  vol.  xxi.  p.  86. 

■^  Ibid.,  p.  S2.  'Ibid.,  p.  71. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  239 

central  organ  being  partly  situated  in  the  ganglia  of  the 
abdomen.^ 

I  also  call  attention  to  an  additional  remark  of  Mr. 
Landois  important  for  our  further  researches  ;  in  many 
cases,  he  says,  sound  productions  have  the  purpose  of 
preserving  the  individual,  and  some  insects  produce 
sounds  in  case  of  danger  only.- 

The  birds'  "song"  is  the  song  proper  in  the  animal 
kingdom.  Numerous  examples  of  it,  quoted  in  notes, 
have  been  given  so  many  times  that  I  scarcely  need  col- 
lect them.  I  may  mention,  however,  some  unique  obser- 
vations of  nnc  species  by  travellers  in  countries  little 
known  to  European  zoologists.  One  of  the  most  interest- 
ing of  these  observations  was  made  by  Pechuel.^  One 
bird  sang  eight  to  twelve  notes  down  the  chromatic  scale, 
the  last  ones  prolonged  and  softer,  as  if  meditating. 
Another  sang  at  sunrise  only,  others  again  two  to  three 
bars,  or  exact  musical  phrases.  Some  sang  all  the  year 
round '^  except  in  August  before  the  rain-season  began. 
Mr.  Byam  heard  in  Central  America  a  bird  singing  the 
notes  of  the  A  major  chord  down  to  the  lower  octave.^ 
On  the  river  of  Orellana,  Spaniards  found  a  bird  which 
followed  them  for  miles  and  cried  "buy,  huv"  ;  approaching 
a  village  it  cried  "  huis,"  which  means  houses.''  It  is 
remarkable  that  notwithstanding  the  melodiousness  of 
birds'  song  birds  have  no  ear  for  time  and  are  bound  to 
keep  every  phrase  they  once  acquire  to  the  same  key.' 

Among  the  mammalia  cats  have  the  most  remarkable 
faculty  of  hearing  shrill  sounds  ;  next  to  them  in  sensibility 

^Graber,  /.  c,  p.  142.  -  Landois,  /.  c,  p.  180. 

■'  Pechuel,  /.  c,  iii.  pp.  263-270. 

■*  Other  examples  of  birds,  the  song  of  which  is  not  restricted  to  the 
love-season,  by  Spencer,  "  Orig.  of  Mus.,"  Mind,  Oct.,  1S90. 

5  Byam,  Ceiitr.  Amcr.,  I.  c,  p.  159.  *•  Herrara,  /.  c,  p.  37. 

7  The  singing  Hesperomys  cognatus,  observed  by  S.  Lockwood  (/.  c), 
had  no  ear  for  time,  kept  to  the  same  key  of  B  (two  flats),  and  strictly  in  a 
major  key. 


240  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

are  little  do,e^s,  not  large  ones,  and  sometimes  ponies.^ 
Thus  the  sense  of  hearing  does  not  seem  to  correspond  to 
their  faculty  of  uttering  sounds.  This  latter  is  the  more 
difficult  to  be  judged  about  as  our  limits  of  hearing  are 
so  different.  When  singing  mice  were  exhibited  in 
London  some  people  who  went  to  hear  them  could  hear 
nothing,  others  a  little,  others  again  very  much.-  On  the 
other  hand,  the  loudest  voices  are  not  the  most  musical, 
and  not  every  emission  of  sound  can  be  called  singing. 
In  speaking  of  such  utterances  Lunn  says  :  "  It  is  objected 
by  physiologists  that  tigers,  oxen  and  other  beasts  having 
loud  voices  have  neither  false  chords  nor  ventricles,"  and 
therefore  their  voices  are  unmusical.  The  cuckoo's  call, 
the  cat's  purr,  and  the  ass's  bray  are  each  the  result  of 
inspiration  and  expiration.  Song-birds  all  sing  on  expira- 
tion.^ Birds'  songs  alone  have  all  the  physiological  char- 
acteristics of  singing. 

The  monkey's  tones  of  voice  are  so  distinctly  varied, 
when  these  animals  are  on  duty  as  posts  or  scouts  on  the 
flanks  or  rear,  that  a  person  much  accustomed  to  watch 
their  movements  will  at  length  fancy  that  he  can  under- 
stand their  signals.*  Mr.  Garner  actually  succeeded  in 
understanding  them,  and  by  catching  and  reproducing 
these  sounds  by  means  of  a  phonograph  he  got  the  apes 
to  do  the  corresponding  action.^  But  this,  and  so  many 
examples  of  the  animal's  call,  proved  that  the  vocal  utter- 
ance, originally  produced  as  emotional  reflex,  has  been 
used  later  on  with  a  certain  intention,  a  special  meaning, 
i.e.,  in  an  intellectual  way.  All  these  utterances  in  the 
animal  kingdom — when  they  once  become  conscious  and 

^  Gallon,  Iiiqiiir.,  pp.  39-40. 

'Ibid.  In  his  experiments  with  Gallon's  whistle  Mr.  Zwaardenmaker 
found  that  our  limits  of  hearing  correspond  so  exactly  to  our  age  that  we 
may  judge  of  age  according  to  limits  of  hearing  (/.  c,  p.  53). 

'  Lunn,  /.  c,  p.  95.  *  Parkyns,  /.  c,  i.  p.  229. 

^  Garner,  /.  c,  p.  232.  I  cannot,  however,  sympathise  with  Mr.  Garner's 
fantastic  attempt  to  obtain  an  articulate  speech  of  monkeys. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  24I 

and  cease  to  be  mere  emotional  reflexes — have  so  much 
more  the  character  of  a  communication  than  of  an  aesthetic 
product  that  they  resemble  more  closely  primitive  speech 
than  primitive  art.  Surely  a  call  (of  females)  or  a  cry  (of 
danger)  is  a  word  or  a  suppressed  sentence,  but  not  a  com- 
position, although  the  former  may  in  its  outward  appear- 
ance closely  resemble  a  musical  phrase ;  the  psychical 
difference  is  immense  nevertheless.^  In  apes  especially 
the  intelligence  for  communication  is  highly  developed.- 

There  is  a  remarkable  peculiarity  of  the  gorilla  which 
is  of  more  importance  in  the  question  of  its  musical  ability 
than  all  its  vocal  utterances — the  gorilla  drums.^  Mr. 
Falkenstein  observed  he  beat  his  breast  with  both  fists  : 
"  im  tJbermass  des  Wolbefindens  und  aus  reiner  Lust," 
getting  up  on  the  hinder  feet.  At  the  same  time  he  clapped 
his  hands,  and,  turning  himself  round,  began  to  dance  in 
such  a  jovial  manner  that  the  observer  thought  the  ape 
must  be  drunk.  Yet  he  was  not,  and  all  his  jumping 
originated  from  a  mere  pleasure  in  doing  it  ("  surplus  of 
vigour").  He  was  not  taught  to  do  so,  and  never  did  in 
Europe,  perhaps — as  Falkenstein  justly  concludes — be- 
cause his  health  failed.  It  is  known  that  the  gorilla, 
when  attacking  his  enemy,  beats  his  breast  in  exactly  the 
same  manner. 

Gorillas  are  not  at  all  the  only  dancing  and  drumming 
species  in  the  animal  kingdom.     The  tetrao  phasianellus 


1  On  the  difference  of  emotional  and  intellectual  expression  see  my 
essay,  "  Uber  die  Bedeutung  der  Aphasie,"  in  Viertclj.  f.  Miisikw.,  vii., 
Jahrg.,  i.  Heft. 

-  Garner's  above-mentioned  observations  distinctly  point  to  power  of 
reflection  in  apes.  The  late  female  chimpanzee,  Sally,  in  the  Zoological 
Gardens  "  knew  the  difference  between  three  and  five  straws "  (Morgan, 
Anim.  Sketch,  p.  ji).  "  Later  on  she  was  able  to  count  uptoten,  and  to  twenty 
when  with  the  guard  alone."  The  Cays,  which  themselves  possess  plaintive 
and  joy&il  tones,  learn  how  to  distinguish  various  modifications  of  the  voice 
as  well  as  of  the  features  (Rengger,  /.  c,  pp.  51  and  55). 

^  Falkenstein,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  152  ;  confirmed  by  Du  Chaillu  and  Koppenfels. 
16 


242  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

(North  America)  runs  round  and  round  in  a  circle/  the 
snipe  drums  with  his  tail,  the  tetrao  umbellus  and  the 
kali]  pheasant  in  the  Himalayas  drum  with  their  win<^s. 

Ostriches  dance  a  waltz,  they  beat  the  ground,  and 
then  they  revolve,  at  first  slowly,  gently  beating  time 
with  their  wings,  but  soon  quicker  and  quicker,  until  at 
length  they  twirl  round  at  a  bewildering  rate,  sweeping 
round  and  round  with  breathless  rapidity.^  These  man- 
ners of  dancing  much  resemble  the  dances  of  some  savage 
tribes. 

With  these  facts  to  hand,  we  shall  have  to  object  to 
Darwin's  view,  that  the  original  music  w^as  the  bird's  love- 
song,  and  that  the  agreeable  feelings  which  naturally 
accompanied  it  were  transmitted  (through  individual  here- 
dity) to  further  generations  and  even  species,  and  that  this 
accounts  for  the  pleasure  men  have  in  music.  I  shall 
have  to  object  to  this  theory  from  different  standpoints, 
and  first  of  all  from  a  psychological  one. 

I.  It  is  possible  that  male-birds  of  handsomer  plumage 
are  preferred  by  the  hen-birds,  but  may  we  thence  infer 
that  birds  understand  painting  ?  Similarly  some  male- 
birds  may  be  preferred  by  the  hens  for  the  quality  of  their 
song;  can  we,  therefore,  say  that  they  understand  music? 
Is  the  bird's  song  a  composition  ?  Certainly  not.  But  by 
music  we  always  understand  a  musical  composition,  or  at 
least  its  reproduction,  that  is  to  say,  a  consciously  designed 
and  constructed  work  of  art.  I  am  aware  that  there  is 
no  difference  in  kind  between  the  bird's  instinct  and  the 
human  design  ;  there  is  only  a  difference  of  degree,  as 
between  mind  and  instinct  generally,  but  this  degree  must 
nevertheless  be  attained  before  we  are  justified  in  speaking 
of  any  group  of  sounds  as  music.  Birds  have  no  conscious 
intention  of  charming  b}-  the  display  of  magnificent  hues 
in  such  and  such  a  manner,  nor  is  it  within  their  power 

^  Darwin,  /.  c,  ii.  pp.  68,  74.  -  Morgan,  Aiiun.  Skit.,  p.  171. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  243 

to  choose  their  colours  any  more  than  it  is  to  change  their 
songs,  so  as  to  make  them  correspond  with  their  feehngs. 
A  corresponding  change  may  actually  have  taken  place 
in  many  cases,  but  are  we  sure  that  it  was  intended  ? 
Can  we  take  it  as  a  consciously-arranged  composition  ?  ^ 

On  the  other  hand,  however,  it  may  be  asked  whether 
the  hen-birds,  in  distinguishing  between  different  singers, 
do  not  show  that  they  appreciate  their  singing  to  at  least 
a  limited  degree.  But  even  if  it  be  admitted  that  they 
really  appreciate  singing,  their  discriminative  taste  for  bird- 
minstrelsy  could  as  little  be  called  a  feeling  for  music  as 
their  distinguishing  one  bird's  plumage  from  another 
amounts  to  a  feeling  for  painting.  No  doubt,  every  bird 
hears  sounds  and  distinguishes  the  call  of  one  bird  among 
that  of  others,  but  it  is  one  thing  to  hear  a  sound,  another 
to  recognise  it  as  a  melody.  We  usually  say  the  hen- 
bird  chooses  the  best  singer,  but  which  is  the  best  singer  ? 
The  audience  in  a  concert-room  do  not  agree  which  singer 
is  the  best,  while  we  pretend  to  know  exactly  which  bird 
sings  the  best  and  to  think  that  the  hen-bird  knows  it  too 
and  is  certainly  of  the  same  opinion  as  ourselves  !  Not 
one  of  us  knows  whether  the  hens'  choice  among  the  cock- 
birds'  singing  is  awarded  on  musical  grounds,  whether 
other  motives  do  not  prompt  them  to  follow  the  males, 
and  whether  the  coincidence  between  their  action  and  a 
certain  quality  of  song  be  only  a  matter  of  chance.  To 
me  it  appears  that  birds  are  lacking  in  that  act  of  reflection 
by  which  they  might  comprehend  the  time-ordered  melody 
as  a  whole,  and  distinguish  it  from  a  certain  number  of 
incoherent  notes.  Birds  do  not  keep  time  unless  they 
reproduce    invariably   and    mechanicall}'   the    same    short 

^  There  was  a  time  when  the  bee  was  called  a  good  mathematician 
because  of  the  admirable  construction  of  the  honeycomb,  "  whereas  it  is 
now  generally  admitted  to  be  the  result  of  the  simple  principle  of  economy 
of  material  applied  to  a  primitive  cylindrical  cell  "  (Wallace,  Darzvinism, 
P-  336). 


244  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

refrain  at  the  same  pitch,  and  I  fear  that  in  speaking  of 
bird-music  we  impute  too  much  of  human  psychological 
interest  both  to  their  declarations  of  love  and  to  their 
appreciation  of  the  so-called  "song". 

As  to  that,  some  writers  would  seem  to  have  a  special 
mission  to  interpret  the  language  of  birds.  Mr.  Berg,  for 
instance,  assures  us  that,  strictly  speaking,  all  kinds  of 
animals  equipped  with  a  sound-apparatus,  including  frogs 
and  crickets,  "  must  be  considered  as  musical  creatures, 
since  they  experience  the  same  feelings  in  their  concerts 
as  music  excites  in  us,  and  many  of  them  pursue  in  music 
the  same  object  as  ourselves '".  I  must  confess  I  envy 
Mr.  Berg  his  ability  of  extracting  correct  information  from 
frogs,  crickets,  and  the  like,  as  to  their  musical  attainments, 
and  I  envy  too  the  frog  himself  for  his  admirable  knowledge 
of  what  causes  pleasure  in  human  beings,  without  which 
he  would  never  have  been  able  to  compare  his  own  feelings 
with  ours,  or  to  disclose  that  he  takes  the  same  pleasure 
in  croaking  as  we  in  singing ;  we  poor  men  sometimes  do 
not  know  ourselves  of  what  our  pleasure  in  art  consists. 
Darwin  himself  says  (/.  c.,  p.  74)  :  "  We  must  not  judge  by 
the  standard  of  man's  taste  "'.  As  we  are  men,  however, 
and  do  not  know  other  standards  of  taste,  we  had  better 
not  judge  at  all.  Romanes  again  says  (Aniiii.  IntclL, 
p.  282)  "that  the  standard  of  sesthetic  taste  differs  in 
different  species  of  birds  as  it  does  in  different  races  of 
men  ".  If  this  is  so  we  can  never  get  to  the  bottom  of 
birds'  aesthetic  taste,  as  we  cannot  ask  them.  It  is  as  if 
we  would  say  the  magpie  is  covetous  as  it  stole  a  sovereign  ; 
it  was  a  false  one,  it  is  true,  but  this  shows  that  there  are 
different  standards  of  covetousness.  In  fact,  however, 
the  magpie  was  struck  by  the  lustre,  not  by  the  money,  as 
birds  are  affected  by  the  sound  without  being  inspired  by 
the  music.  Indeed,  not  even  in  the  relations  of  the  sexes 
can  the  sense  of  beauty  be  said  to  play  an  important  part 
in  the   animal  kingdom,  and   it   is  this  peculiar  part   of 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  245 

Darwin's  theory  which  has  been  altered  in  the  most 
satisfactory  way  by  Westermark  (/.  c,  pp.  240-252).  Not 
different  standards  of  beauty  caused  racial  differences — as 
Darwin  supposed — but  racial  differences  were  caused  by 
different  necessities  to  best  suit  the  surroundings.  These 
"  outward  manifestations  of  physical  perfection  "  may  have 
been  taken  later  on  in  higher  stages  of  mental  develop- 
ment as  beauty  in  the  aesthetic  sense.  "  Even  if  we 
grant,  as  we  fairly  may,  that  brightly  coloured  flowers, 
.  .  .  in  association  with  nectar,  have  been  objects  of 
appetence  to  insects,  and  that  brilliant  plumage,  in  associa- 
tion with  sexual  vigour,  has  been  a  factor  in  the  preferential 
mating  of  birds  ;  this  is  a  very  different  thing  from  saying 
that  either  in  the  selection  of  flowers  by  insects,  or  in  the 
selection  of  their  mates  by  birds,  a  consciously  aesthetic 
motive  has  been  a  determining  cause  "  (L.  Morgan,  Anim. 
Intel!.,  p.  413).  In  my  opinion  the  simple  beating  of  a 
drum  contains  more  "  music"  than  all  the  sounds  uttered 
by  birds,  and  we  owe  our  musical  faculty  to  the  time-sense 
rather  than  to  our  sense  of  hearing.  Of  course,  in  follow- 
ing the  utterances  of  the  animal  kingdom  down  to  a  very 
primitive  stage,  we  must  go  back  as  far  as  the  bird's  song, 
but  we  are  not  more  or  less  justified  in  discerning  in  it  the 
origin  of  music,  than  we  should  be  in  saying  that  all 
animals  equipped  with  sound-apparatus  speak  English, 
the  English  language  being  just  as  peculiar  an  order  of 
utterance — of  which  the  peculiar  origin  is  still  sub  jndicc — 
as  is  human  music.  The  origin  of  language  is  not  to  be 
sought  in  the  fact  that  birds  call  "cuckoo,"  cluck  "go- 
back,"  or  imitate  our  speech,  but  in  our  connecting  certain 
things  and  ideas  with  certain  sounds.  It  is  true  some 
animals  do  so  too,  but  why  then  do  we  not  at  once  call 
birds  little  poets,  who  sing  the  praises  of  universal  love  as 
they  flit  in  the  forest  from  bough  to  bough  ?  We  know 
now-a-days  that  even  some  kinds  of  fishes  produce  sounds  : 
why  are  not  they  considered  musical  ?     There  must  be  as 


246  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

^reat  a  difference  between  these  sounds  and  our  music  as 
there  is  between  a  barking  dog  and  a  poet — a  difference 
perhaps  only  of  degree,  but  yet  of  so  many  degrees  as  to 
render  us  unable  to  call  both  by  the  same  name,  and  this 
for  the  same  reasons  as  prevent  us  from  calling  a  fish  an 
ape,  although  in  the  scale  of  animals  the  latter  is  evolved 
from  the  former.  I  cannot  conclude  this  subject  better 
than  in  Morgan's  words  :  "I  do  not  for  one  moment  deny 
that  in  animals  are  to  be  found  the  perceptual  germs  of 
even  the  higher  emotional  states,  but  adequate  terms  must 
be  to  a  large  extent  emptied  of  their  meaning  before  they 
can  become  applicable  to  the  emotional  consciousness  of 
brutes"    (L.   Morgan,  Anim.  IntelL,  p.  414). 

2.  There  is  also  biological  evidence  against  Darwin's 
theory  of  our  pleasure  in  music.  The  emission  of  sound 
such  as  we  hear  in  nature  does  not  develop  correlatively 
with  the  evolution  of  the  higher  classes  of  animals.^  It 
might  indeed  be  possible  with  some  little  trouble  to  show, 
as  Darwin  did,  that  there  is  something  akin  to  singing 
even  amongst  mammalia,  but  it  will  never  be  possible  to 
show  that  this  so-called  singing  of  mammalia,  if  from  a 
musical  point  of  view  it  be  worth}-  of  notice  at  all,  is  really 
developed  from  birds'  singing,  with  human  song  as  its 
highest  outcome.  It  is  not  even  singing  proper  from  a 
mere  physiological  point  of  view  (as  we  have  seen,  p.  240). 
Birds'  song  is  in  many  cases  not  at  all  confined  to  the 
love  season,-  and  it  is,  to  say  the  least,  extremely  doubtful 
that  acquired  modifications,  such  as  those  due  to  the 
accompanying  feelings  of  the  bird's  song,  are  transmittable 
to  the  offspring  and  to  further  species  (Weismann).  But, 
even  if  all  Darwin's  hypothesis  were  correct,  I  have  a 
further  objection,  taken  from  the  character  and  develop- 
ment of  the  bird's  song,  which  we  will  now  take  into 
consideration  : — 

^  Compare  Stumpf,  Mtisikpsych.  in  England,  I.  c,  pp.  300-314. 
-  Spencer,  "  Orig.  of  Mus.,"  Mind,  Oct.,  1890. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  247 

"  The  younf^  bird  acquires  his  song  b}-  traditional 
inheritance,"  that  is,  each  brood,  endowed  by  physio- 
lof^ical  inheritance  with  the  necessar\'  organs  for  singing, 
learns,  after  long  practice,  by  constantly  hearing  the  song 
of  its  elders,  "the  melody /it'f///mr  to  that  specics'\^  Thus 
the  most  important  factor  in  acquiring  a  song  is  direct 
imitation  ;  -  it  may  happen  that  if  the  bird's  tutors  belong 
to  another  species,  the  bird  learns  the  song  of  this  other 
species,  not  of  its  own.  W'itchell  in  his  careful  investiga- 
tion into  this  subject  also  confirms  the  above  :  '*  The  songs 
of  birds  are  not  immediately  acquired,  but  developed  in 
each  individual  b}-  practice  and  culti\'ation  ".^  Thus  the 
composer  Spohr  observed  a  species  of  cuckoo  at  Thiera- 
chern  in  Switzerland,  which  somehow  acquired  a  third 
tone  between  the  common  two  of  the  cuckoo's  call  (singing 
G,  F,  Ej.^  The  primitive  sounds  of  birds  are  onomato- 
poetic,  e.g.,  sounds  produced  by  eating,  signify  food,^  and 
so  probably  many  other  pleasing  sounds  might  be  traced 
to  a  very  material  association  without  betraying  an 
aesthetic  sense  in  an}'  way.  This  accounts  for  gregarious 
birds  being  garrulous,  solitary  species  silent.  Mr.  Witchell 
further  shows  in  examples  that  the  call-note  and  the 
danger-cry  have  a  common  origin,  namely,  the  cry  of 
distress/'  while  a  whole  phrase  is  constructed  by  means  of 
repetition  of  the  alarm-cry,  accompanied  by  rapid  move- 
ment of  the  lungs  similar  to  that  which  occurs  during 
human  laughter.'' 

Bearing  in  mind  that  the  original  cause  of  sounds 
being  uttered  was  distress  or  alarm,  and  assuming  that 
Darwin's  presumption  were  true,  the  feeling  which  origin- 
ally accompanied  the  emission  of  sound  could  consequently 

^  Clark,  /.  c,  p.  209.  -  Morgan,  An.  Int.,  p.  454. 

3  Witchell,  /.  c,  p.  240  ;  so  also  is  mimicry  (p.  242) ;  Witchell  used  the 
phonograph  in  getting  the  songs  (p.  245). 

■1  Spohr,  /.  c,  i.  p.  257.  5  vVitchell,  /.  c,  p.  236. 

^ Ibid.,  p.  234,  ''Ibid.,  p.  238. 


248  ■  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

not  only  accompany  it  in  further  stages  of  development 
but  could  also  be  transmitted  to  future  generations.  Thus 
making  music  ought  to  have  the  most  awful  consequences. 
Darwin  does  not  seem  to  have  taken  into  consideration 
that  the  bird's  love-song  means  a  comparatively  high  stage 
of  its  vocal  utterances. 

It  is  also  improbable  from  a  biological  point  of  view 
that  if  anything  be  transmitted  from  one  generation  to  the 
other,  that  it  should  at  the  same  time  be  entirelv  trans- 
mitted from  one  sex  to  the  other.  "  While  among  birds 
it  is  the  male  which  generally  sings,  it  is  the  female  among 
men,  who  excels  in  voice  and  tries  to  attract  the  males."  ^ 
To  this  is  due— according  to  Haeckel  —the  general  practice 
of, and  perfection  in, female  singing  in  our  "highh-  civilised" 
society. 

3.  There  is  finally  a  physiological  evidence  against  the 
theory  that  human  music  should  be  the  direct  outcome  of 
the  bird's  song.  I  still  maintain  that  this  is  much  more 
the  case  with  human  words  than  with  human  music.  If 
the  third  frontal  convolution  in  the  bird's  brain  is  stimu- 
lated by  an  electric  current  the  bird  begins  to  "sing". 
Now  this  third  frontal  convolution  is  the  specch-centvo.,  on 
which  our  musical  faculty  does  not  at  all  depend.- 

In  former  days  we  had  a  much  simpler,  }-et  similar 
theory,  without  heredity  and  development,  according  to 
which  men  learned  music  by  direct  imitation  of  the  singing 
of  birds.  We  have,  however,  never  heard  of  an  imitation 
of  the  melody  in  birds'  song  among  savages.  The\-  imitate 
every  bird's  call,  but  not  what  we  call  the  melody  of  the 
singing  birds  proper ;  wherefore,  I  presume,  men  do  not 
acknowledge  the  song  of  birds  as  music  before  they  are 
themselves  well  advanced  in  the  art.  Moreover,  Austra- 
lians have  songs  and  music  but  scarcely  any  singing  birds. 
"  Feebly  indeed,  among  Australia's  birds,  are  represented 

•■  Haeckel,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  247. 

-Compare  my  article  on  "Aphasia,"  /.  c  p.  58,  note  2. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  249 

the  melodious  notes  which  are  freely  poured  forth  b\-  man\- 
of  the  species  inhabiting  countries  north  of  the  equator 
...  no  mavis  has  she  to  usher  in  the  morning  ...  no 
Philomel  to  break  the  stillness  of  the  night  .  .  .  quietude, 
as  regards  the  voice  of  birds,  reigns  supreme  ;  or  if  there 
be  any  exception  to  this  rule  it  is  the  noisy  screams  of  her 
parrots,  honey-eaters,  manura,  reed-birds."  ^ 

Some  time  ago  Prof.  Weismann,  in  an  essa\'  full  of 
interesting  and  important  matter,  declared  that  music 
arose  "as  a  secondary  effect  of  our  sense  of  hearing  not 
originally  intended  in  nature".  It  is  perhaps  a  verbal 
contention  to  question  whether  we  are  justified  in  speaking 
of  intention  and  of  secondary  effects  in  nature,  but  I  do 
not  think  that  our  musical  faculty  is  an  effect  of  our  sense 
of  hearing,  because  the  perception  of  particular  tones  and 
tunes  plays  a  very  low  part,  if  any,  in  primitive  music  — 
certainly  a  much  lower  part  than  the  rhythmical  arrange- 
ment. It  is  perhaps  for  this  reason,  as  Prof.  \\'eismann 
endeavoured  to  show,  that  the  sense  of  hearing  in  human 
beings  was  well  developed  before  musical  practice  began, 
and  was  not  developed  by  wa}-  of  the  latter."'  I  entirel}- 
agree  with  Prof.  Weismann  in  his  assertion  that  the  same 
sense  of  hearing  produces  different  musical  effects  accord- 
ing as  there  are  in  human  beings  different  qualities  of 
"soul".  My  conclusion,  however,  is  that,  in  an  inquiry 
into    the    origin   of   music,  it   is   this    peculiar  quality  of 


^  J.  Gould,  /.  c,  i.  p.  2  ;  Meinicke,  Aiistr.,  i.  p.  85. 

-  Brehm  in  his  Thierlebcn  and  Prof.  Sully  in  an  essay  on  "  Animal 
Music  "  [Cornliill  Magazine,  1879,  ii.  605)  came  to  the  same  conclusion. 
Stumpf  (Tonpsych.,  i.  p.  344)  also  says  :  "  The  human  ear  has  not  improved 
in  historical  times  ".  Comp.  Lubbock  (TZ/wt's,  p.  597):  "The  music  of  savages 
is  rude  and  melancholy  in  comparison  with  ours :  and  thus,  though  the  ear 
of  man  may  not  have  appreciably  altered,  the  pleasure  which  we  may  derive 
from  it  has  been  immensely  increased ".  Burney,  however,  says:  "What 
is  rnusic  ?  An  innocent  luxury,  unnecessary,  indeed,  to  our  e.xistence,  but  a 
great  improvement  and  gratification  of  the  sense  of  hearing"  (Hist.  0/  Miis., 
preface,  p.  xiii.). 


250  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

"  soul "'  which  has  to  be  examined,  and  not  a  certain 
condition  of  the  sense  of  hearing.  And  this  quahty  is  the 
time-sense  with  the  faculty  of  discerning  in  the  strength, 
velocity,  increase,  and  decrease  of  sounds  produced  by  our 
"  surplus  vigour,"  forms  corresponding  to  the  flow  of  our 
feelings  and  ideas. 

THE  SPEECH-THEORY. 

Another  theory,  according  to  which  music  arose  from 
speech,  seems  to  me  to  explain  a  correct  observation  in  a 
wrong  direction.  We  can  see,  in  almost  all  the  examples 
furnished  by  ethnology,  that  music  is  the  expression  of 
emotion.  There  is  no  doubt  that  emotion  is  one,  though 
only  one,  of  the  sources  of  human  language.  Consequently 
we  speak  in  faster  or  slower,  louder  or  softer,  higher  or 
deeper  tones,  and  with  more  or  less  variety  of  accent,  for 
the  same  reasons  as  would  influence  us  in  musical  ex- 
pression. And  since  through  speech  the  ideas  which 
influence  the  form  of  our  expression  generally  (to  wit,  its 
intensit}-,  strength,  rapidity,  and  modulation)  acquire  a 
deflnite  verbal  setting,  we  learn  to  connect  certain  ideas 
with  certain  forms  of  expression.  B}-  reason  of  this  con- 
nection between  our  ideas  and  feelings  and  some  form  of 
expression  we  come  more  easily  to  associate  them  with 
any  kind  of  music. 

We  need  not  push  this  theory  too  far.  Music  will 
certainly  develop  this  form  of  expression,  than  which  it 
has  no  other,  in  a  different  manner  from  speech,  the  only 
media  of  which  are  tones  and  their  modulation,  though 
the  accompanying  mode  of  diction  is  not  to  be  neglected  : 
it  renders  possible  the  composition  of  a  poem,  and  qualifies 
music  as  a  higher  intellectual  pleasure  than  any  simple 
auditory  impression  could  be.  The  characteristic  feature, 
in  my  opinion,  of  Mr.  Spencer's  speech-theory  is,  that  he 
first  showed  an  intimate  physiological  connection  between 
all  our  emotions  and  their  expression,  leading  us  to  discover 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  25I 

vestiges  of  music  in  declamation  and  conversely.  This  it 
is  which  distinguishes  it  from  all  other  speech-theories  of 
the  last  centur}',  which  assumed  the  simple  imitation  of 
language  ready-made  (a  notion  long  since  refuted  in  the 
speech-controvers}'  of  that  century,  notably  bv  Langere  ; 
see  Jullien,  La  uiusiqnc  ct  la  philosophic  dii  W'lIInic  sicclc). 

Whereas  Mr.  Spencer,  howe\'er,  seems  to  think  that 
musical  modulation  originates  in  the  modulations  of  speech, 
I  maintain  that  it  arises  directl}-  from  the  rhythmical 
impulse.  It  is  true  that  modulation  in  the  developed  art 
of  music  is  very  often  influenced  by  the  modulations  of 
speech,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  this  influence  occurs 
to  a  greater  extent  in  modern  music  than  in  the  older 
classical  school  (take  Berlioz,  Wagner,  Beethoven  in  the 
gth  symphony,  and  compare,  sa}-,  with  Palestrina  and 
Handel).  Herein  may  lie  the  source  of  that  unanimity 
which  I  have  noticed  between  the  most  zealous  opponents 
and  adherents  of  the  speech-theory  on  the  one  point,  viz., 
that  vestiges  of  declamation  are  to  be  met  with  in  music, 
and  that  we  ought,  on  the  strength  of  this  advance,  to 
finish  a  controversy  nearly  a  century  old.  That  it  has 
become  customary  for  our  composers  to  have  regard  to 
the  inflections  of  the  speaking  voice  does  indubitably 
facilitate  the  connection  of  ideas  and  feelings  with  music, 
even  if  it  be  purely  instrumental ;  but  the  fact  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  question  of  the  origin  of  music.  Even 
admitting  the  present  reciprocity  of  influence  in  both 
music  and  speech,  I  doubt  that  such  is  the  origin,  and  that 
for  several  reasons. 

I.  We  find  even  in  the  most  primitive  state  of  culture 
a  sort  of  recitative,  side  b}-  side  both  with  a  kind  of  music, 
in  which  the  rhythm  alone  plays  a  leading  part,  and  with 
songs,  the  words  of  which  are  perfectly  meaningless  or  at 
least  cannot  be  understood  by  the  tribe  in  question.  In 
such  circumstances  it  is  obviously  impossible  for  the 
musical  modulations  to  have  taken  rise  from  the  spoken 


252  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

modulations,  since  there  is  no  genuine  speech  in  the  case 
at  all.  Among  savages  primitive  vocal  music  reveals  in 
many  cases  no  connection  with  language,  but  is  simplv  a 
succession  of  musical  sounds  sung  by  the  voice.  The 
recitative  is  a  secondary  form  of  poetical  speech,  the 
structure  of  which  is  influenced  by  music  already  invented, 
but  it  is  by  no  means  the  original  type  of  music.  It  is 
only  made  possible  in  stages  where  speech  is  so  far 
advanced  as  to  allow  of  connected   sentences  or   stories. 

2.  Primitive  music  cannot  have  evolved  from  modula- 
tion of  the  voice  in  emotional  speech,  as  the  most  primi- 
tive music  is  in  so  man}-  cases  no  modulation  of  tone  but 
merely  a  rhythmical  movement  in  one  tone,  as,  e.g.,  in 
Tierra  del  Fuego,  in  Fiji  Islands,  and  with  some  tribes  of 
the  North  American  Indians.  Therefore,  Mrs.  Brown  in 
her  interesting  book  on  Musical  Instniuicnts  justly  remarks  : 
One  of  the  two  characteristic  features  of  primitive  music 
is  the  "  decided  prominence  of  the  rhythmic  as  opposed 
to  the  melodic  element  "  ;  the  second  is  the  "  monotony 
which  results  from  the  fact  that  most  of  primitive  songs 
are  contained  within  a  very  narrow  compass  ".^  "  The 
sense  of  time  seems  to  have  been  highly  developed  in 
man  long  before  he  had  the  faintest  conception  of  what 
we  call  melody." - 

3.  Speech  expressed  in  song  does  not  develop  at  the 
same  rate  as  speech  itself;  on  the  contrary,  the  intellectual 
importance  of  singing  declines  with  the  higher  develop- 
ment of  language.  Examples  of  a  word  changing  its 
meaning  when  spoken  with  a  different  vocal  inflection  are 
only  to  be  met  with  in  primitive  language.  Mr.  Spencer 
in  his  recent  essay  says:  "It  may  be  that  music  uses 
distinct  tones  and  speech  indistinct,  but  the  former  might 
be  developed  from  the  latter  ".  If  this  were  so,  we  should 
inevitably  discern  some  traces  of  this  development  in  its 

'  Brown,  /.  c,  p.  242.  -Ibid.,  p.  243. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  253 

continual  advance  from  a  primitive  stage  up  to  perfectly 
artistic  songs,  just  as  we  are  able  to  follow  a  parallel 
development  from  the  movements  of  a  primitive,  up  to 
those  of  a  modern,  dancer. 

4.  Music  is  an  expression  of  emotion,  speech  the  ex- 
pression of  thought.  If  we  assume  that  music  originates 
in,  and  is  developed  from,  speech,  we  must  also  assume 
that  emotion  is  developed  from  thought.  It  may  be  that 
in  the  adult  human  organism  particular  emotions  do  arise 
in  this  way,  but  it  is  not  true  of  emotions  generall}'.  More- 
over, many  cases  of  aphasia  prove  that  an  expression  can- 
not be  emotional  and  intellectual  at  the  same  time,  the  one 
kind  of  expression  arising  in  and  spreading  through  different 
parts  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system  from  those  occupied 
by  the  other.  It  may  be,  however,  that  in  a  very  primitive 
stage  of  mental  development  thought  and  emotion  have 
not  yet  become  clearly  differentiated.  To  illustrate  my 
point,  let  us  compare  singing  and  speaking  with  drawing 
and  writing.  Each  member  of  these  pairs  constitutes  at 
the  present  day  a  distinct  order  of  activities,  though  at 
one  time  each  pair  wrought  with  the  same  materials, 
writing  being  picture-drawing,  just  as  singing  and  speak- 
ing ma}'  have  used  the  same  vocal  sounds.  Each,  being 
a  specifically  different  mode  of  expression,  developed  its 
material  in  course  of  time  in  a  very  diverse  manner,  till 
musical  tones  and  spoken  sounds  came  to  be  as  distinct 
one  from  the  other  as  a  picture  from  a  letter.  Similarly 
Mach  says  (/.  c,  p.  125)  that  "  music  stands  to  speech  as 
the  ornament  to  writing".  There  are  indeed  some  primi- 
tive ornaments  the  appearance  of  which  is  such  as  to 
render  it  impossible  to  distinguish  them  from  primitive 
written  characters  (compare  Grosse,  /.  c,  pp.  403,  404)- 
Yet  the  psychical  source  is  in  both  cases  quite  different. 
Although  writing  a  scientific  book  is  entirely  intellectual, 
yet  we  may  observe  a  good  deal  of  emotional  element  in 
the  written  characters  of  its  MS. ;  and  there  was  still  more 


254  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

of  this  element  in  the  MSS.  of  ancient  times.  Even  early 
prints  betray  this  emotional  influence.  Nevertheless,  it 
would  be  ridiculous  to  say  that  great  painters  write  more 
beautifully,  and  that  people  with  prettier  handwriting 
possessing  frequent  emotional  traces  have  more  talent  for 
drawing.  No  one  would  say,  nor  indeed  has  any  one  said, 
that  drawing  originated  in  writing,  or  writing  in  drawing. 
I  think  then  that  music  and  speech  did  not  arise  the  one 
from  the  other,  but  that  both  arose  from  (or  together 
with)  an  identical  primitive  stage  in  one  of  their  common 
elements.  Hence  it  happens  that  in  inquiring  into  the 
origin  of  music  we  necessarily  come  into  contact  with 
primitive  language,  and  in  inquiring  into  the  origin  of 
speech  we  come  into  contact  with  primitive  music,  or, 
more  correctly  speaking,  with  the  corresponding  sounds. 
Primitive  human  utterance,  using  sound-metaphors  and 
onomatopoeia  in  order  to  make  itself  intelligible,  may 
resemble  primitive  musical  tones  ;  nevertheless  an  early 
separation  of  distinct  tones  and  indistinct  sounds  seems 
to  have  taken  place,  not  as  a  transition  from  the  one  as 
prior  to  the  other  as  succeeding,  but  as  a  di\-ergence  from 
a  primitive  state  which  is,  strictly  speaking,  neither  of  the 
two.  Sometimes,  however,  a  kind  of  unity  remains  even 
through  later  periods  of  civilisation,  as  ethnology  can 
show  (e.g.,  in  Dahomey,  Siam,  China,  Japan,  Tierra  del 
Fuego)  ;  and,  bearing  this  in  mind,  we  cannot  say,  as  has 
been  alleged  by  so  many  opponents  of  the  speech-theory, 
that  there  is  no  singing  in  speech  in  the  world  at  all. 
For  this  reason  I  should  not  agree  with  Gurney,  who  said 
"that  the  six  or  eight  wordless  notes,  which  a  child  of 
four  will  croon  over  to  itself  with  never-ceasing  delight, 
are,  both  in  themselves  and  in  their  emotional  effect,  as 
truly  and  absolutely  remote  from  speech  as  is  the  Eroica 
symphony  ".  They  would  be  so  indeed  if  they  were  purely 
musical  notes,  but  they  are  in  fact  neither  music  nor  speech. 
I  have  never  heard  an  infant  really  sing — that  is  to  say, 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  255 

invent  (though  it  may  repeat)  a  song — before  it  could 
speak,  while  its  crying  is  unfortunately  a  very  familiar 
experience  ;  and  it  is  just  this  power  of  uttering,  no  matter 
what,  that  enables  it  in  course  of  time  to  evolve  a  facult}' 
both  of  singing  and  speaking.  Gurney's  further  remark — 
that  music  is  a  separate  order,  an  adjustment  of  pro- 
portional elements,  of  which  speech  knows  nothing — ^is 
inapplicable  to  all  its  elements,  since  music  has  one 
element  in  common  with  speech,  viz.,  sound-production. 
Look  at  the  results  of  ethnological  research.  It  is  as 
difficult  to  tell  whether  a  primitive  utterance  is  sufficiently 
developed  to  be  called  musical  as  it  is  to  know  whether  it 
can  properly  be  called  language  or  not.  This  is  perhaps 
the  reason  why  Darwin  and  Mr.  Spencer  do  not  agree  on 
the  question  as  to  which  comes  first,  music  or  language. 
"  Spencer,"  said  Darwin,  "  comes  to  an  exactly  opposite 
conclusion  to  that  at  which  I  have  arrived.  He  con- 
cludes, as  Diderot  did  formerly,^  that  the  cadences  used 
in  emotional  speech  afford  the  foundation  from  which 
music  has  been  developed,  whilst  I  conclude  that  musical 
notes  and  rhythm  were  first  acquired  by  the  male  or 
female  progenitors  of  mankind  for  the  sake  of  charming 
the  opposite  sex.  Thus  musical  notes  became  lirmly  [I 
should  rather  say,  possibly]  associated  with  some  of  the 
strongest  passions  an  animal  is  capable  of  feeling."  I 
think  Darwin's  mistake  in  the  sentence  here  quoted  lies 
in  his  speaking  of  "  music,"  instead  of  musical  sounds,  i.e., 
sounds  which  come  to  be  used  later  in  music. 

Since  the  above  was  written  for  the  first  time  in  Mind 


1  This  statement  is  not  quite  correct,  as  Diderot  did  not  speals:  of  the 
origin  of  music,  but  only  of  "  Ic  niodele  dit  chant  ".  "  C'est  la  declamation, 
si  le  modele  est  vivant  et  peasant,  c'est  la  bruit,  si  le  modele  est  inanime. 
II  faut  considerer  la  declamation  comme  une  ligne  et  le  chant  une  autre 
ligne  qui  serpenterait  sur  la  premiere"  (Diderot,  /.  c,  p.  198).  "  Je  ne  vou- 
drais  pas  assurer  que  celui  qui  recite  bien  chantera  bien  ;  mais  je  serais 
surpris  que  celui  qui  chante  bien  ne  sut  pas  bien  reciter  "  (ibid.,  p.  199). 


256  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

(July,  i8gi),  Mr.  Spencer  published  a  reply  in  the  same 
journal,  Oct.,  1891.  To  this  I  can  only  repeat  what  I  said 
in  my  reply  in  Jan.,  1892.  Mr.  Spencer  takes  objection 
that  I  should  credit  him  with  having  said  music  arises 
from  the  intellect,  whereas  he  had  named  the  emotions  as 
its  origin.  And  in  stating  this  he  quotes  his  own  words  : 
"  We  may  say  that  cadence,  comprehending  all  variations 
of  voice,  is  the  commentary  upon  propositions  of  the 
intellect".  Now,  it  was  precisely  to  this  that  I  took 
objection,  namely,  that  the  emotions  leading  to  music  (or 
as  I  put  it  more  directly,  music)  should  be  held  to  arise 
as  a  commentar}'  upon  intellechial  propositions ;  and  I 
pointed  to  the  physiological  fact  that  emotion  and  intellect 
are  associated  with  different  parts  of  the  brain  and  nervous 
system.  The  origin  of  emotions,  and  consequently  of  all 
their  resulting  products,  must  be  independent  of  all  pro- 
positions of  the  intellect. 

With  respect  to  his  remark  that  it  is  not  true  to  sax- 
speech  is  an  expression  of  thought,  I  must  again  refer  to 
those  cases  of  aphasia  where  the  patient  retains  the 
language  of  the  emotions,  the  power  of  uttering  single 
words,  and  of  singing,  when  the  power  of  speaking 
connectedly  has  long  been  lost.  Emotions  have  un- 
questionably a  language  of  their  own  ;  from  them  single 
words  may  arise,  but  speech,  so  far  as  modern  physiology 
and  pathology  can  show,  is  an  intellectual  form  of  ex- 
pression. Mr.  Spencer  concludes  :  "  The  whole  argument 
of  his  essay  is  to  show  that  it  is  from  this  emotional 
element  of  speech  ( ! )  that  music  is  evolved  ".  Certainl}- : 
but  this  emotional  element,  he  says,  grows  up  in  pro- 
portion to  the  intellectual  (Essays,  p.  422),  the  changes 
of  voice  grow  with  the  "  more  numerous  verbal  forms 
needed  to  convey  our  ideas  ".  It  is  the  dependence  which 
I  call  in  question  ;  for  the  growth  of  the  intellectual  and 
emotional  elements  are,  physiologically  speaking,  in  no 
connection  whatever. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  257 

Baker  in  his  treatise  on  "  Music  of  the  North  American 
Indians  "  came  to  the  conclusion  that  of  the  two  distinct 
forms  of  primitive  music  (rhythmical  dance  music  and 
recitati\'e)  the  former  was  the  more  ancient,  and  this  for 
several  reasons  {vide  p.  i86). 

There  are  besides  some  minor  points  in  the  speech- 
theory  requiring  perhaps  further  explanation.  My  experience 
has  not  shown  me  that  people  who  have  a  singing  element 
in  their  speaking  voice  are  more  musical  than  others.  And 
even  in  their  case  it  would  be  impossible  as  a  rule  to  put 
down  any  given  spoken  accents  in  notes.  Again,  these 
accents  are  not  objectively  fixed,  nor  is  speech  an  abstract 
organon  separated  from  all  concrete  life.  Ever\'  one  utters 
the  same  idea  in  his  own  fashion,  and  speech  is  only  the 
sensuously  perceptible  part  of  a  great  psychical  process, 
differing  in  different  individuals  at  different  times.  It 
may,  therefore,  be  no  easy  matter  merely  to  imitate  the 
modulations  of  speech,  nor  would  it  aid  us  in  being 
mutually  more  intelligible  (though  it  might  afford  us  a 
good  deal  of  guess-work  in  ideas),  nor  could  music  (I 
mean  the  art  as  such)  ever  evohe  a  new  language,  because 
musical  forms — that  is  to  say,  the  intensity,  strength, 
velocit}',  increase  and  decrease  of  tones — can  be  understood 
only  in  a  relative  sense.  Mr.  Walker  tried  as  early  as 
1789  to  put  the  so-called  natural  song  of  speech  down  to 
notes,  which  attempt — so  frequently  made  since  then — 
must  necessarily  be  a  failure.  Walker  is  quite  right  in 
stating :  Singing  notes  rest  on  one  note,  speaking  ones 
slide  up  and  down  "  without  any  perceptible  rest  ".^  But 
this  is  precisely  the  reason  why  Mr.  Walker's  attempt 
to  fix  the  notes  of  the  "song"  in  speech  is  in  itself  a 
contradiction  and  practically  a  voluntary  transformation. 
Such  theories  have  been  refuted  a  hundred  times  during 
centuries,  but  have  nevertheless  constantly  arisen  again. 

^Walker,  /.  f.,  p.  7. 
17 


258  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

It  has  very  often  been  said  that  music  represents  only 
the  typical  forms  of  feeling.  Strictly  speaking,  however,  it 
is  impossible  to  represent  the  type  as  such.  Representation 
is  individualisation.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  equallv  im- 
possible to  express  by  musical  methods  all  our  particular 
feelings.  Can  we  evade  this  dilemma  ?  I  think  so.  The 
musician  is  situated  similarly  to  the  anatomist,  who  gets 
a  small  piece  of  bone  and  is  able  to  tell  exactly  whether 
it  is  a  human  bone  or  not.  It  is  not  of  course  the  human 
type  as  such  that  is  represented  by  the  bone,  and  no  one 
can  tell  to  which  individual  the  bone  belonged,  \et  we 
recognise  in  this  small  fraction  of  a  particular  man  the 
human  type.  So  I  too  am  not  wrong,  I  hope,  in  asserting 
that  music  reproduces  such  a  small  fraction  of  the  forms 
both  of  external  and  internal  nature  that  we  can  recognise 
in  it  at  best  the  type,  and  not  the  specific  details.  Music 
can  rouse  feeling,  but  it  cannot  cause  what  it  is  we 
feel,  this  being  the  outcome  of  each  individual  psychical 
organism.^  Coincidence  between  the  feelings  of  composer 
and  audience  can  be  only  a  fortuitous,  not  a  necessary, 
result,  because  of  the  relati\e  nature  of  musical  forms. 
Nor  is  it  essential,  from  an  artistic  point  of  view,  that  they 
should  completely  coincide,  since  in  the  culti\ation  and 
exercise  of  music  a  man's  intention  is  not  so  much  to 
make  himself  intelligible  as  to  inspire  his  fellow-men. 

Correlative  to  the  decline  in  the  importance  of  vocal 
inflection  as  an  intellectual  factor  in  human  communica- 
tion, as  language  undergoes  higher  development,  is  the 
suggestive  power  of  specific  ideas  implanted  in  highly- 
developed  music  by  feelings  and  associations,  differing  in 
different  psychical  organisms.  And  from  those  vague 
associations,  suggested  in  a  primitive  stage  by  rhythmical 
movements,  are  developed  the  higher  pleasures  of  melody. 

I  am  well  aware  that  celebrated  composers  and  specula- 

^  In  asserting  this  rule,  some  musical  forms  of  a  stereotyped  character, 
such  as  a  funeral  march  or  a  waltz,  cannot  be  taken  into  account. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  259 

tive  "philosophers  "  have  been  opposed  to  the  importance 
of  rhythm  in  music,  but  I  am  also  aware  that  our  best 
possessions  are  not  the  theories,  but  the  works  of  art, 
bequeathed  us  by  the  former,  and  that  our  best  philosophy 
is  not  of  the  speculative  order.  Whatever  enthusiastic 
musicians  or  "philosophers"  may  have  said  of  a  music 
of  the  future  without  rhythm,  I  always  feel  inclined  to 
interpret  their  prophecies  poetically  rather  than  scientific- 
ally, and  believe  that  what  Gurney  said  on  the  other  side 
will  remain  true:  "Wherever  rhythm  is  perceived  with 
enjoyment  there  is  implied  a  nascent  stimulation  of  the 
dance-instinct,  and,  however  much  music  '  ought  to  be  ' 
independent  of  time,  I  am  afraid  that  in  listening  to  it,  with 
our  present  physical  organisms,  we  shall  retain  a  prejudice 
for  rhythmical  phenomena  in  preference  to  unrhythmical 
noumena  ". 

With  regard  to  the  dance-instinct  Lombroso  gave 
the  physiological  explanation  that  the  auditory  nerve 
stands  in  so  close  connection  with  the  spinal  cord  that 
we  may  say  "  dancing  is  a  sort  of  reflective  motion  caused 
by  music  ".^  It  may  be  well  to  remember  that  the  famous 
Laura  Bridgman  perceived  the  rhythm,  arrangement, 
and  loudness  of  tones  through  vibrations  of  the  soil. 
Another  deaf,  dumb,  and  blind  girl,  Helen  Keller,  was 
also  fond  of  music  :  "  Elle  fut  tellement  enlevee  par  la 
cadence  de  la  musique  qu'on  eut  beaucoup  de  peine  a 
I'empecher  de  danser".- 

TALES  AND  LEGENDS. 

Hindus  attribute  the  origin  of  music  to  divine  agency. 
Brahma  invented  it  in  virtue  of  his  active  power,  as  the 
goddess    of   speech,    Saraswati.^     The   Chinese    have    an 

^Lombroso,  /.  c,    p.  145.  -  Belugon,  /.  c,  p.  176. 

*  Panchkari  Banerjea,  /.  <:.,  p.  4.  He  also  attributes  the  decline  of 
music  in  India  to  the  music  masters  or  ostads  :  "  Ignorant  generally  as  they 


26o  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

ancient  tradition  according  to  which  they  obtained  their 
musical  scale  from  a  miraculous  bird.^  According  to  the 
Japanese  tradition  the  sun-goddess  once  retired  into  a 
cave  when  music  was  devised  by  the  gods  to  lure  her 
forth  from  the  retreat.  Hence  the  natives  of  the  Indian 
Archipelago  shout  and  beat  gongs  when  an  eclipse  takes 
place.-  The  Javans  say  the  first  music  of  which  they 
have  an  idea  was  produced  by  the  accidental  admission 
of  the  air  into  a  bamboo  tube  which  was  left  hanging  on 
a  tree.  With  regard  to  the  music  of  gamelan,  "that, 
say  they,  was  procured  from  heaven,  and  we  have  a  long 
story  about  it  ".^  Unfortunately  this  story  was  never 
told 

The  xAsaba  people  (on  the  Niger)  say  that  music  was 
first  brought  into  the  country  by  a  hunter  named  Orgardie, 
a  native  of  Ibuzo,  upon  his  return  from  an  expedition  in 
search  of  big  game.  There  he  heard  music  in  the  thick 
forest  proceeding  from  a  party  of  forest  spirits  that  were 
approaching.  He  remembered  the  steps  of  the  dances  and 
the  music  of  the  songs  sung,  and  upon  his  return  to  his 
village  taught  his  countrymen  this  music,  which  was 
called  Egu  olo.  From  Ibuzo  music  was  imported  to 
Asaba  land.  It  must  be  mentioned  that  every  fresh 
dance  or  song  is  believed  to  have  been  first  heard  by 
hunters  during  their  expeditions  in  the  jungles.*  It  is 
interesting  to  see  how  they  appreciate  music  in  connection 
with  dance,  i.e.,  from  its  rhythmical  side,  and  how  they 
take  to  it  after  the  hunt,  i.e.,  when  their  energy,  employed 
in  the  hunt  (struggle  for  life)  a  few  moments  before,  ceases 
to  be  employed  and  then  finds  another  vent  in  the  form 
of  play. 


are  of  the  other  branches  of  knowledge,  as  a  rule,  do  not  unreservedly  teach 
their  pupils.  They  fancy  that  should  they  teach  all  that  they  know,  they 
would  ere  long  be  thrown  into  the  shade  by  their  pupils"  (p.   26). 

1  Engel,  Myths,  etc.,  i.  p.  75.  "  Crawfurd,  /.  c,  i.  p.  304. 

"  Raffles,  /.  c,  p.  472.  "*  Day,  Niger,  p.  274. 


ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    MUSIC.  261 

According  to  a  myth  of  the  Nahua  Nations  (North 
America)  the  god  Tezcathpoca  sent  for  music  from  the 
Sun,  and  constructed  a  bridge  of  whales  and  turtles 
(symbols  of  strength)  by  which  to  convey  it  to  the  earth. ^ 
The  messenger  went  towards  the  house  of  the  Sun  singing 
what  he  had  to  say.  And  the  Sun  heard  the  song,  and 
he  straightway  warned  his  people  and  servants,  saying : 
"  See,  now,  that  ye  make  no  response  to  this  chant,  for 
whoever  replies  to  it  must  be  taken  away  by  the  singer  ". 
But  the  song  was  so  exceedingly  sweet  that  some  of 
them  could  not  but  answer,  and  they  were  lured  away, 
bearing  with  them  the  drum,  teponaztli,  and  the  kettle- 
drum, vevetl.-  Remarkable  from  a  psychological  point 
of  view  is  the  story  told  by  the  Maidu  tribes  (North 
America)  :  An  old  man  had  in  his  hand  the  sacred 
rattle,  from  which  all  others  since  have  been  modelled, 
and  said  to  his  friends:  "Always  when  you  sing  have 
this  rattle  with  you,  and  let  it  be  made  after  the  pattern 
which  I  now  show  you.  The  spirit  of  sweet  music  is  in 
this  rattle,  and  when  it  is  shaken  your  songs  will  sound 
better."  ^  Thus  those  tribes  seem  to  have  the  same  im- 
pression as  we  have,  that  accompanying  noises  facilitate 
the  musical  imagination.  An  Arabic  legend  says  that 
Modhar,  the  camel  driver,  fell  down  from  his  seat  and  had 
his  arm  hurt.  In  his  pains  he  repeatedly  called  :  "  Ya, 
yadah  ".  His  fine  voice  stirred  up  the  camels,  they  ran 
more  quickly,  and  from  that  time  all  the  camel  drivers 
sang.  This  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  song  in  Arabia,* 
although  it  looks  like  a  joke  rather  than  a  myth.  The 
natives  of  Abyssinia  have  a  tale  on  the  origin  of  music 
according  to  which  S.  Yared  was  the  author  of  music, 
inspired  as  he  was  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  appeared 
to  him   in  form   of  a  pigeon,  teaching   him   at  the  same 


^  Bancroft,  /.  c,  ii.  p.  92.  -Ibid.,  iii.  p.  63. 

•*  St.  Powers,  /.  c,  p.  296.  ■*  Christianowitsch,  /.  c,  p.  12. 


262  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

time  reading,  writing,  and  music^  A  similar  tale  is  that 
of  the  Armenians.  Here  Mesrop  invented  music  in  the 
year  364  b.c.,-  while  Svrian  music,  i.e.,  church  music, 
was  invented  by  St.  Ephrem,  370  b.c.^  In  ancient 
mythologies  the  invention  of  stringed  instruments  fre- 
quently has  some  connection  with  the  sea  or  water 
generally,  so  has  the  god  Nareda  of  the  Hindus,  Nereus 
of  the  ancient  Greeks,  the  Scandinavian  god  Odin,  and 
Wainamoinen,  in  the  old  national  epos  of  the  Finns,  con- 
structed his  instrument  out  of  fish  bones  ;  many  Swedish, 
Scotch,  Norwegian,  and  Danish  stories  show  the  same 
connection.^ 

1  Villoteau,  /.  c,  p.  135.  "Ibid.,  p.  161. 

^Ibid.,  p.  154,  note  i.  ■•  Compare  Engel,  Myths,  vol.  i.  p.  75. 


CHAPTER  X. 
HEREDITY  AND  DEVELOPMENT. 

Since  Darwin's  epoch-making  researches  the  scientific 
world  has  scarcely  been  more  occupied  by  any  subject 
than  the  inquiry  into  how  the  immense  progress  from  the 
primitive  cell  up  to  the  human  organism  may  be  satisfac- 
torih'  explained.  For  a  time  the  doctrine  of  heredity 
seemed  to  have  furnished  the  correct  answer,  until  Mr. 
Fr.  Galton  and  Mr.  August  Weismann  tried  to  explain 
the  laws  of  development  in  a  new  and  peculiar  way. 
Darwin,  as  is  well  known,  assumed  that  all  the  changes 
brought  upon  an  organism  from  without  are  at  once 
despatched  to  the  germ,  and  through  it  transmitted  to 
further  generations.  Some  slight  modification  of  this 
theory  was  adduced  by  Mr.  W.  K.  Brooks,  who  attempted 
to  prove  that  only  those  parts  of  the  body  that  were  not 
in  sound  condition  despatched  small  particles  (gemmules) 
to  the  germ-cells.  Now  these  gemmules  are  but  a  mere 
hypothesis,  and  so  the  question  again  arises  how  it  is  that 
the  germ-cell  can  assume  all  the  hereditary  tendencies 
of  the  whole  organism.  Here  Mr.  Weismann  tries  to 
show  that  "  the  germ-cells  are  not  derived  at  all,  as  far 
as  their  essential  and  characteristic  substance  is  con- 
cerned, from  the  body  of  the  individual,  but  they  are 
derived  directly  from  the  parent  germ-cell".^  Therefore 
all  heredity  is  brought  about  by  the  peculiar  substance  of 
the  "  germ-plasm  "  alone,  which  is  preserved  unchanged 
—  in  spite  of  ordinary  changes  of  the  somatic  cells — for 

'  Weismann,  /.  c,  p.  170. 
(263) 


264  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

the  formation  of  the  germ-cells  of  the  fc 
(Theory  of  the  "  continuity  of  the  germ-plasm  ".)  Accord- 
ingly hereditary  transmission  can  take  place  (i)  either  by 
such  external  influences  as  directly  affect  the  reproductive 
cells,  not  only  the  somatic  ones,  or  (2)  by  two  different 
germ-plasms  of  different  individuals  being  mixed  together 
and  combined  by  procreation.  Consequentl\-  acquired 
characters  are  not  transmitted  to  the  next  generation,  for 
they  are  simply  the  reaction  of  the  organism  upon  a 
certain  stimulus  from  without.  It  is  only  the  original 
predisposition  which  is  transmitted,  or,  in  other  words,  the 
character  of  the  "  germ-plasm  "  alone  is  transmitted. 

At  this  result  Mr.  Galton  has  also  arrived  in  another 
wav,^  by  stating  that  all  the  changes  the  organism  under- 
goes in  consequence  of  external  influences  are  not 
hereditary  unless  they  directly  affect  the  reproductive 
elements.  As  an  example  of  the  comparativeh"  great 
independence  of  the  mother's  organism  from  the  child's, 
he  mentions  the  following  interesting  experiment :  "  If  in 
an  anatomical  preparation  the  veins  of  the  mother  are 
injected  with  a  coloured  fluid,  none  of  it  enters  the  veins 
of  the  child  ;  and  vice  versa.  Again,  not  only  is  the  unborn 
child  a  separate  animal  from  its  mother,  that  obtains  its 
air  and  nourishment  from  her  purely  through  soakage, 
but  its  constituent  elements  are  of  very  much  less  recent 
growth  than  is  popularly  supposed."- 

I  could,  of  course,  not  attempt  to  settle  the  question 
as  to  the  heredity  of  acquired  characters,  but  I  may  look 
upon  the  subject  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  biographer 
and  historian.  Here,  too,  the  difficulties  seem  to  be  little 
less  than  in  biology.  First  of  all  we  cannot  exactly 
define  the  term  "  musical,"  at  least  not  in  a  way  practi- 
cable for  scientific  researches.  Then  in  many  cases  we 
do  not  agree  as  to  the  greatness  of  a  well-known  composer, 

'  Galton,  Theory  of  Heredity.       -Galton,  Nat.  Iitli.,  pp.  15  and  i5. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  265 

while  at  the  same  time  a  considerable  amount  of  real 
talent  has  remained  unobserved,^  not  having  been  able  to 
put  itself  forward  in  the  most  favourable  light.  Finally 
we  have  the  well-known  musician  families,  all  their 
members  taking  up  music  as  a  profession  without  leaving 
us  the  slightest  clue  as  to  their  real  musical  abilities, 
especially  if  we  are  to  judge  centuries  after.  Therefore, 
I  do  not  think  that  all  the  minute  researches  of  M.  Ribot - 
and  Mr.  Galton,  excellent  and  interesting  in  themselves, 
will  ever  contribute  to  deiinitely  settle  the  question  of  the 
heredity  of  acquired  modifications. 

There  is  the  Bach  family  with  fifty-seven  composers, 
of  whom  only  one  became  a  first-rate  composer,  while  all 
of  them  were  professional  musicians  ;  Donizetti's  brother, 
being  a  conductor  of  a  military  band  is,  unfortunately, 
no  proof  of  his  musical  ability — as  experience  shows. 
Michael  Haydn  would  probably  have  remained  entirely 
unknown  but  for  his  celebrated  brother  Joseph.  Meyer- 
beer's brother  Michael  was  anxious  to  be  taken  for  a  poet : 
Mozart's  sister  and  sons,  Mendelssohn's  grandfather  were 
all  in  their  way  so  moderately  gifted  as  to  make  us 
presume  similar  talent  might  have  occurred  in  numerous 
families,  the  artistic  importance  of  which  has  never  been 
taken  into  account.  According  to  Mr.  Galton's  most 
complete  researches,^  of  120  musicians  whose  relations 
were  traced,  twenty-six,  or  one  in  five,  had  celebrated 
relations.  Of  musicians  of  first  rank  Mr.  Galton  mentions 
seven  with  musical  relations  :  Bach,  Beethoven,  Handel, 
Haydn,  Mendelssohn,  Mozart,  Spohr.  I  am  afraid  that  the 
artistic  merit  of  all  these  relations  was  so  modest  that  it 
would  never  have  been  considered  worthy  of  remark  if  it 
had  happened  in  other  families.     In  the  end  the  works  of 

1  "  The  taxation  of  a  celebrity  will  always  remain  unsettled  and  sub- 
jective ;  even  the  science  and  history  of  art  is  subject  to  constant  changes 
and  new  systematic  treatment"  (Hirth,  /.  c,  vol.  ii.  p.  529). 

- L'heriditc  Psychologiquc.  ■'Galton,  Hercd.  Gen.,  p.  329. 


266  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

such  composers  with  celebrated  relations  may  be  different 
from  those  without  such  relations,  but  in  consequence  of  the 
mere  external  circumstance  of  their  living  in  the  artistic 
atmosphere  and  not  in  consequence  of  an  internal  peculiar 
gift.  Mr.  Royse,  in  his  Study  of  Genius,  justly  remarks  : 
"  Haydn's  father  was  a  wheelwright,  and  his  mother  a 
cook — employments  which,  neither  singly  nor  together, 
would  seem  to  favour  the  development  of  a  concord  of 
sweet  sounds.  A  drunken  tenor  singer  was  Beethoven's 
father.  Schubert's  father  and  forefathers  for  several 
generations  were  schoolmasters.  Schumann's  father 
was  a  bookseller."  ^  It  is  utterly  impossible  now  further 
to  examine  their  mental  capacity,  and  thus  the  biographical 
way  in  the  case  of  celebrated  men  leads  to  no  satisfactory 
result. 

There  is,  however,  still  another  question  to  decide, 
whether  the  composer  owes  all  he  is  able  to  do  to  external 
influences,  to  favourable  surroundings,  or  to  his  internal 
gift.  Speaking  of  internal  and  external  influences,  it  is 
\Qr\  tempting  to  deal  with  the  question  in  a  mere  abstract 
way  and  to  say  :  No  influence  is  purely  and  absolutely 
external,  for  to  be  effective  it  must  be  a  thing  in  itself, 
must  be  of  some  peculiar  internal  quality,  and  is  therefore, 
if  viewed  from  "another  standpoint,  an  internal  influence; 
to  possess  any  quality  it  must  be  effective  upon  its  sur- 
roundings and  might  therefore  be  taken  as  an  external 
influence.  The  student  of  logic  will  easily  avoid  this 
circle  of  ideas  by  saying  that  internal  and  external  influ- 
ences, within  and  without,  are  correlative  terms  dependent 
upon  each  other,  merel}-  serving  the  purpose  of  marking 
diff"erent  parts  of  one  and  the  same  process  which  can 
never  be  separated  in  two  by  a  distinct  line.- 

1  Royse.  /.  c,  p.  i68. 

-  I  find  this  view  put  forward  in  a  very  able  manner  in  a  philosophical 
paper  of  Mach's  ("  Analys.  d.  Empfindungen,"  p.  141):  "There  is  no  cleft 
between   psychical   and  physical  proceedings,  nothing  purely  internal   and 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  267 

I  am  well  aware  that  nothing  is  won  by  merely  abstract 
considerations.  Let  us  therefore  refer  to  the  concrete 
example  of  the  whales  so  often  mentioned  b}-  biologists. 
These  whales,  although  living  in  the  water,  are  originally 
derived  from  terrestrial  mammalia,  and  this  (i)either  through 
a  mere  internal  power  to  change,  or  (2)  through  external 
influences  that  met  either  (a)  with  a  pre-existing  though 
latent  disposition  (germ),  or  (b)  changed  even  the  germ 
without  its  having  any  such  tendency. 

Abrupt  as  it  may  be,  I  will,  nevertheless,  at  once  pass 
from  the  w^iale  to  the  musician  and  will  ask  a  similar 
question  as  to  his  musical  ability.  Does  a  man  become  a 
composer  merely  by  his  (internal)  talent  or  by  external  influ- 
ences (surroundings)  which  transform  his  mental  tendencies 
entirely,  or  give  to  his  pre-existing  but  hitherto  latent 
disposition  a  certain  direction  ?  I  am  in  favour  of  this 
last  view.  Examples  from  the  history  of  music,  not  to 
speak  of  the  experience  of  every-day  life,  will  no  doubt 
contribute  to  make  the  statement  clearer.  Richard 
Wagner  is  said  to  have  conceived  the  idea  of  his  "  Flying 
Dutchman  "  on  a  sea  voyage  from  Riga  to  Havre,  under 
the  direct  impression  he  got  while  on  board.  May  we 
therefore  say  that  this  opera  of  his  owes  its  origin  to  a 
mere  external  influence  ?  Certainly  not,  for  thousands 
make  the  same  voyage  without  ever  composing  anything 
like  the  "  Flying  Dutchman  ".  Rossini  is  said  to  have  only 
composed  when  in  want  of  money.  Now,  millions  are  in 
the  same  position  and  yet  they  never  compose  a  "Barbiere 
di  Seviglia".^  In  both  artists  there  must  have  been  some- 
thing that  only  needed  the  external  stimulus  to  be  brought 

external,  no  sensation  to  which  a  '  thing  as  such '  different  and  independent 
from  the  sensation  would  correspond  ".  Mr.  James  in  his  Psychology  seems 
to  be  in  favour  of  this  view  ;  similarly  Dr.  Grosse  in  his  pamphlet  on 
"  Spencer's  Doctrine  of  the  Unknowable  "  (/,  c). 

'  Other  examples  of  surroundings  influencing  the  composer's  fancy  from 
the  life  of  Handel,  Haydn,  Schubert,  Beethoven,  by  Royse,  /.  c,  pp.  148, 
152. 


268  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

to  light  ;  and  this  is  what  we  lind  in  the  artistic  genius 
in  general,  the  internal  disposition  and  the  external 
cause  ;  but  we  can  scarcely  say  where  one  ends  and  the 
other  begins.  And  now  it  may  be  well  to  remind  the 
reader  that  our  abstract  and  merely  logical  consideration 
leads  to  the  same  result,  that  internal  and  external  influ- 
ences, within  and  without,  are  only  different  names  for 
one  and  the  same  process  which  in  reality  cannot  be 
separated  into  two  distinct  parts.  The  artist,  it  is  true, 
does  not  owe  his  genius  to  ordinary  influences  of  e\-ery-day 
lite,  not  to  schools,  teachers,  examinations,  testimonials, 
etc.,  but  nevertheless  to  his  surroundings,  although  it  may 
be  difficult,  not  to  say  impossible,  to  trace  the  effect  of 
his  delicate  susceptibility  in  every  instance  to  the  external 
cause.  Therefore,  I  am  afraid  we  shall  never  be  able  to 
say  how  much  of  the  artistic  genius  is  an  acquired  char- 
acter, and  how  much  an  innate  disposition.  Consequently 
the  question  as  to  the  heredity  of  acquired  modifications 
becomes  still  more  complicated,  and  direct  evidence  will 
probably  never  be  available.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
strong  evidence  against  its  validity,  for  this  theor\-  does 
not  explain,  even  in  the  slightest  degree,  the  development 
in  music  ;  indeed,  I  consider  it  downright  impossible  that 
heredity  of  acquired  modifications  contributes  an3'thing 
to  the  development  of  music.  Biologists  will  ver}-  likely 
consider  this  a  surprising  and  sudden  decision  to  come  to, 
but  I  will  ask  them  to  consider  the  following  historical 
fact  :— 

What  an  immense  progress  has  not  the  opera  made 
from  the  days  of  Bellini  and  Donizetti  to  Richard  Wagner, 
or  instrumental  music  from  Haydn  to  Berlioz  !  To  what 
degree  of  perfection  has  not  piano  playing  been  brought 
by  Liszt,  violin  playing  by  Paganini  !  Yet  their  pupils 
far  surpassed  the  old  masters  —and  can  this  be  said  to 
be  due  to  heredity  ?  Before  the  accomplishments  of  one 
artist  had  been  made  intelligible  to  the  people  through 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  269 

heredity,  or  could  have  been  imitated  owing  to  hereditary 
transmission,  we  should  have  had  to  wait  for  another 
laurentian  or  silurian  period  in  order  to  make  the  progress 
from  Haydn  to  Mozart,  or  from  Weber  to  Wagner.  But 
all  this  advancement  has  been  made  within  a  few  years, 
during  the  life-time  of  one  and  the  same  generation.  This 
could  only  be  possible  when  every  progression  in  music 
was  at  once  imitated  and  preserved  objectively  for  later 
generations.  This  principle  of  objective  heredity  (as  I 
should  call  it  in  short)  alone  explains  the  rapid  progress 
in  music  during  the  last  thirty  to  forty  years.  How  could 
it  otherwise  have  taken  place  ?  Through  elimination  of 
the  organisms  that  were  unfavourable  to  musical  talent, 
and  through  combination  of  those  better  adapted,  or 
through  individual  heredity  ?  Time  has  been  far  too 
short  to  accomplish  anything  of  the  kind  ;  and  yet  the 
progress  has  taken  place,  and  tradition  as  w^ell  as  imitation 
will  explain  it,  although  they  do  not  furnish  any  direct 
evidence. 

In  the  same  way  I  would  explain  moral  development 
and  the  transmission  of  instincts.  Those  birds  on  the 
islands  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  which  saw  men  for  the  first 
time  without  being  frightened  at  them,  need  not  have  ac- 
quired the  instinct  of  flight  by  experience  and  transmitted  it 
to  the  next  generation.^-  Nor  is  it  necessary  to  say  that 
only  those  birds  survived  that  already  had  this  instinct 
originally,  for  if  a  sufficient  number  had  it  travellers 
would  not  have  made  the  observations  that  the  birds  did 
not  fear  men.  In  my  opinion  a  single  terrifying  experience 
of  one  bird  taught  the  others  that  witnessed  it,  and  their 
fear,  acquired  simply  by  reflexive  and  direct  imitation,  was 
again  imitated  by  all  other  birds.  If  one  bird  flies  away  in 
terror  the  others  follow ;  if  this  happens  often  enough  the 
habit  is  acquired  for  life-time,  and  as  the  old  generation 

1  Examples  by  Guyau,  Ediic.  Hcred.,  p.  gS  ;  Weismann,  Essays  (ist  ed.), 
p.  92. 


270  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

does  not  die  out  at  once,  and  the  new  comes  one  bv  one, 
the  tradition  of  flight  is  maintained  quite  apart  from  the 
Hfe  of  single  individuals.  "  Much  of  the  mysterv  of 
instinct— to  quote  Mr.  Wallace— arises  from  the  per- 
sistent refusal  to  recognise  the  agency  of  imitation, 
memory,  observation,  and  reason  as  often  forming  part 
of  it.  Yet  there  is  ample  evidence  that  such  agency  must 
be  taken  into  account."  ^ 

With  the  fact  in  our  mind  that  direct  imitation  and 
tradition  brought  about  all  progress  in  music,  it  still  seems 
incomprehensible  how  the  necessity  for  it  might  ever  have 
existed.  In  the  case  of  birds  and  their  fear  of  men  such  a 
necessity  for  experience  and  progress  is  easily  explained  : 
but  what  was  the  immediate  object  of  music,  what  its 
necessary  connection  with  every-day  life  ? 

Among  arts,  music  especially  seems  to  have  such 
scanty  relations  with  the  necessary  conditions  of  life,  that 
the  question  unconsciously  prompts  itself  how  the  same 
could  attain  that  climax  of  importance  which  it  undoubtedly 
occupies  to-da}-.  To  be  sure  one  hears  not  unfrequently 
that  all  art,  and  music  particularly,  is  a  "  luxus";  that  we 
do  not  derive  from  it  any  prolit  or  advantage,  and  that  its 
development  therefore  cannot  be  explained  by  the  same 
natural  laws  which  otherwise  govern  the  struggle  for 
existence.  But  I  fear  that  one  is  prone  to  look  upon  music 
too  much  from  the  abstract  point  of  view  of  our  time,  and 
not  to  consider  sufficiently  the  position  which  it  still 
occupies  with   primitive  man. 

1  Wallace,  Darwin,  p.  442.  One  of  the  most  striking  differences  in  the 
conception  of  instinct  is  that  of  Lewes  and  Spencer.  While  Lewes  says 
that  instinct  is  "lapsed  intelligence,"  Spencer  thinks  that  intelligence  is 
merely  "compound reflex  action"  (comp.  Romanes,Mcnt.Evol.Ap.im.,  p.  256). 
I  think  that  the  question  cannot  be  decided  as  long  as  we  speak  of  instinct 
and  intelligence  in  general.  Some  peculiar  instinct  may  arise  every  day 
on  the  basis  of  our  intelligence,  while  peculiar  intelligent  ideas  arise  from 
instincts.  Whether  the  majority  of  cases  goes  one  way  or  the  other,  I  do 
not  know. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPIMENT.  271 

Above  all,  one  must  keep  in  mind  that  primitive  music 
does  not  have  any  necessary  connection  with  a  higher 
training  and  evolution  of  the  sense  of  hearing,  and  that 
the  whole  development  of  music,  beginning  from  primeval 
times  to  the  present  period,  has  not  changed  the  human 
ear  in  any  respect.  All  attempts  to  establish  a  connection 
between  music  and  the  exercise  of  the  organs  of  hearing 
must  therefore  be  strictly  excluded  from  our  investigation. 
The  oldest  music  we  know  of  is  no  effect  of  the  sense  of 
hearing,  but  of  the  conception  of  time  ;  it  is  primarily  a 
rhythmic  movement,  divisible  into  bars,  and  only  in  later 
stages  is  it  melody  and  harmony.  We  must  consider 
music  in  the  form  in  which  it  occurs  among  primitive 
men,  viz.,  in  connection  with  dance  and  mimic  representa- 
tion (pantomime).  This  is  at  the  same  time  the  oldest 
manifestation  of  art  we  know  of 

In  regard  to  the  origin  of  art  (including  music),  Mr. 
Herbert  Spencer's  theory  of  the  "  surplus  of  vigour  "  is 
evidently  the  correct  one,  as  far  as  it  goes.  Instead  of  the 
expression  "  surplus,"  another  would  possibly  have  been 
more  concise ;  for  it  appears  to  me  that  the  term 
"  surplus  "  implies  too  much — an  unnecessary  surplus  of 
energy  which  is  supposed  to  occur  among  the  higher 
animals  and  man.  On  this  basis  it  is  easy  to  consider 
all  that  is  effected  by  this  "surplus"  as  an  unintentional 
by-effect,  a  thing  to  which  I  cannot  make  up  my  mind. 
But  it  is  by  no  means  an  excess  of  energy  that  the  higher 
animals  possess,  it  is  only  just  so  much  as  is  sufficient, 
not  only  to  ward  off,  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  the 
enemy  when  he  approaches,  but  to  annihilate  him  com- 
pletely so  that  he  is  not  able  to  come  again.  After  this 
is  done  the  energy  lies  latent  and  is  not  called  into  play 
for  a  time,  and  must  then  be  applied  in  some  way.  When 
the  gorilla  advances  against  an  attacking  enemy  he 
proudly  delivers  blows  upon  his  breast.^     Let  us  suppose 

1  Du  Chaillu,  Eqii.  Afy.,  p.  71. 


272  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

— a  thing  which  will  generally  take  place— that  he  comes 
forth  victorious  from  the  struggle  for  existence  ;  his  energy 
is  then  not  employed,  and  with  exactly  the  same  blows 
with  which  he  goes  to  the  duel  he  entertains  himself  in 
his  hours  of  leisure,  jumping  and  dancing  about  in  a  circle 
and  beating  his  breast  rhythmically.  All  this  takes  place 
not  because  nature  has  given  him  too  much,  not  because 
she  has  given  him  a  surplus  of  energy  for  the  struggle  for 
existence,  but  because  she  has  given  him  just  sufficient 
to  annihilate  his  enemies.  I  also  believe  that  the  lower 
animals  not  only  have  no  surplus  of  power,  but  that  they 
have  distinctly  too  little ;  nevertheless  they  manage  to 
squeeze  through  in  life,  but  they  must  constantly  be  on  the 
lookout  and  not  consume  all  their  energy  in  this  effort, 
while  the  higher  animal  gets  rid  of  its  enemy  and  does  not 
simply  elude  him.  Among  the  lower  animals  this  lack 
of  power  is  usually  recompensed  by  enormous  fertility  in 
order  to  ensure  the  propagation  of  the  species.  That 
energy,  therefore,  which  finds  employment  in  games  and 
dances  is  not  a  surplus /or  which  our  organism  was  originally 
not  adapted ;  the  organism  was  adapted  for  the  energy 
which  is  absolutely  necessary  in  order  to  support  ourselves 
perfectl}-.  But  for  this  very  reason  it  at  times  finds  no 
employment  because  it  has  already  completely  fulfilled  its 
duty.  For  the  struggle  for  existence  even  the  higher 
animals  have  no  surplus  of  energy ;  but  with  them  a 
fight  is  a  rarer  occurrence  than  with  the  lower  animals, 
and  in  consequence  the  state  of  unapplied  energy  is  pro- 
duced. 

Primitive  man  is  in  this  respect  placed  in  exactly  the 
same  position  as  the  higher  animals.  Thus  the  Apono 
(West  of  the  Ashango,  West  Africa)  have  a  war-dance 
called  M'Muirri  which  is  remarkable  for  the  singular 
noises  the  dancers  made,  "  yelling  and  beating  their  breasts 
with  both  hands,  like  the  gorilla,  and  making  a  loud 
vibrating    noise    with    their    lips,    resembling   the    word 


HEREDITY  AND  DEVELOPMENT.  273 

muirri  "}  Moreover,  as  this  dance  is  performed  by  several 
men  they  are  obhged  to  keep  the  rhythmical,  beats  in 
accordance  with  each  other,  because  of  the  peculiar  innate 
tendency  of  rhythm  for  unification.'  Consequently  people 
are  obliged  to  observe  the  rhythmical  beats,  and  thus  the 
mechanical  rhythmic  beating  is  transformed  into  well- 
arranged  intentional  beats  kept  in  strict  time. 

In  addition  to  any  outward  resemblance  to  the  gorilla- 
dance  savage  dances  have  often  also  a  similar  meaning. 
The  war  is  transmuted  into  a  war-dance  after  the  battle 
is  over;  one  and  the  same  sound  is  war-cry  and  primitive 
song ;  the  swinging  of  the  spear  is  their  mode  of  fighting 
and  also  of  beating  time ;  the  same  ponderous  step  is 
attack  and  joyous  dance.  Therefore,  these  dances  are 
not  a  surplus,  a  luxury,  which  primitive  man  allows  him- 
self, they  are  absolutely  necessary  to  prepare  for  the  hunt 
or  war,  and  afterwards  to  preserve  and  develop  their 
power.^  If  daily  life  at  times  does  not  offer  any  occasion 
for  war  the  latter  must  be  invented,  and  the  one  who 
possesses  this  power  of  invention  is  in  fact  the  artist. 
Everywhere  among  primitive  man  the  choral-dance  plays 
the  part  which  we  have  here  assigned  to  it.  In  Australia 
the  war-dance  is  the  preparation  for  war  and  its  sequel ; 
the  songs  of  the  women  goad  on  the  men  to  battle ;  in 
the  South  Sea  Islands  the  songs  of  the  savages  are  fre- 
quently the  cause  of  war ;  in  Madagascar  it  is  even 
customary  for  the  women  to  sing  and  dance  while  the 
men  are  out  to  war,  because  (as  they  themselves  state 
and  believe)  this  strengthens  the  courage  of  the  men.     For 


1  Du  Chaillu,  Ashango  Land,  p.  272. 

'■^  Cf.  Souriau,  /.  c,  p.  65,  "  iinijicatiun  des  rythmes'\ 

^  "  Art  will  be  the  perpetual  revenge  of  those  of  our  faculties  which  are 
not  employed.  One  might  conceive  that  art,  that  luxury  of  our  imagination 
would  end  by  becoming  a  necessity  for  all,  a  sort  of  daily  bread"  (Guyau, 
Esthetique,  p.  11). 

18 


274  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

dance  at  home  a  fetish  dance  in  imitation  of  battle  to 
give  their  absent  husbands  strength  and  courage.^  De- 
scribing a  dance  of  the  Fans,  Du  Chaillu  says  :  One  of  the 
consequences  of  the  dance  will  be  that  we  are  to  have  a 
great  elephant  hunt  (cf-  similar  examples  in  chap,  vii.)." 
The  Kafirs,  the  finest  warriors  of  x\frica,  sing  and  dance 
the  war-dance  with  such  great  rhythmical  precision  that 
the  whole  tribe  (several  hundred  in  number,  as  travellers 
report)  make  the  impression  of  a  single  huge  machine 
working  with  mechanical  precision.  Among  the  Central 
American  aborigines,  Morgan  tells  us,^  "  anv  person  was 
at  liberty  to  organise  a  war-party  and  conduct  an  expedi- 
tion wherever  he  pleased.  He  announced  his  project  by 
giving  a  war-dance  and  inviting  volunteers.  If  he  suc- 
ceeded in  forming  a  company,  which  would  consist  of 
such  persons  as  joined  him  in  the  dance,  the\'  departed 
immediately^  while  enthusiasm  was  at  its  height." 

These  examples  go  to  show  that  the  war-dance  is  a 
war-play,  a  preparation  for  common  action.  This  is  no 
less  the  case  with  pantomimic  representations,  the  primi- 
tive drama,  whose  oldest  form  is  the  animal  pantomime. 
These  animal  pantomimes  (which  are  customary  among 
the  savages  of  all  continents)  betray  such  an  extraordinary 
power  of  observation,  and  so  great  a  familiarit\-  with  the 
character  of  animals,  that  the}-  cannot  possibly  be  without 
a  favourable  influence  upon  the  participants  in  them. 
They  keep  those  performing  in  them  in  constant  practice, 
awaking  interest  in  all  the  spectators  in  hunting,  and  give 
to  them,  one  may  say,  an  instructive  example  which  may 
prove  of  use  to  them  in  case  of  need,  especiall}'  since  the 
talent  of  the  savages  in  mimicking  and  acting  is  such  an 
extraordinary  one,  that  the  animal  pantomime  is  in  truth 
a  representation,  correct  in  all  details,  of  the  actual  hunt. 

1  Tylor,  Aiithr.,  p.  298.  -  Du  Chaillu,  Equ.  A/r.,  p.  81. 

■*  Morgan,  Anc.  Soc,  pp.  117,  118. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  275 

Some  time  ago  the  London  papers  contained  the  report 
that  it  was  customary  among  the  street-arabs  of  the  East 
End  to  play  constable,  magistrate,  and  criminal.  No  small 
indignation  was  expressed  at  this  style  of  amusement, 
because  (as  was  claimed)  the  children  were  in  this  way 
familiarised  too  much  with  the  ingenuity  of  the  police, 
the  proceedings  at  court,  the  tricks  of  criminals,  and  the 
particulars  of  an  exciting  life  in  which  revolt  against  the 
most  necessary  social  restrictions  played  a  very  important 
part.  In  the  same  way  in  which  these  games  are  a  school 
for  crime  the  games  of  the  savages  are  a  preparation  for 
savage  life — war  and  hunting,  i.e.,  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence. Dancing  and  play-acting,  to  quote  Mr.  T3'lor,  seem 
to  savages  "  so  real  that  they  expect  them  to  act  on  the 
world  outside  ".^ 

Up  to  this  point  the  social  importance  of  the  primitive 
drama,  the  pantomime,  will  incur  little  opposition  I  think. 
But  what  has  music  got  to  do  with  all  this  ?  If  these 
representations  were  the  work  of  single  actors  as  now-a- 
days,  music  might  be  missing,  or  it  would  only  be  of 
accessory  importance.  But  in  those  representations  the 
whole  tribe  takes  a  part,  and  this  action  en  masse  is 
only  possible  if  it  manifests  itself  in  the  well-arranged 
form  of  march  and  dance.  The  war-play  as  well  as  the 
animal  pantomime  are  choral-dances  of  the  whole  tribe, 
and  the  precision  with  which  they  are  executed  is  only 
possible  if  a  high  degree  of  natural  rhythmic  sense  exists. 
This  time-sense  is  the  psychological  origin  of  music] 
Primitive  music  in  its  actual  aspects,  with  the  rhythmical 
element  strongly  pronounced,  is  an  organising  power 
which  holds  together  the  participants  in  the  dance  and 
makes  a  common  action  possible.  This  custom  of  the 
whole  tribe  to  act  in  common  as  ojie  body,  and  the  skill 
evinced  in  doing  this,  cannot  be  without  influence  in  the 

^  Tylor,  Anthr.,  p.  296. 


276  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

struggle  for  existence.  Just  because  primitive  music  is 
so  perfectly  united  with  the  wants  of  daily  life,  because  it 
has  such  practical  aims,  has  it  with  such  difficulty  severed 
itself  from  these  wants,  and  so  late  developed  into  an 
independent  art.  In  former  times,  however,  it  was  in- 
separably connected  with  the  war-  and  hunting-play.  It 
is  to  the  warriors  we  owe  the  first  rhythmical  beating  of 
time  ;  to  them  we  owe  the  first  fixed  melodies  (signals)  ; 
to  them  the  first  choral  song  and  the  first  orchestra  (the 
first  orchestra  was  a  military  band),  things  which  are  only 
too  plain  in  the  life  of  the  African  savages.  This  primitive 
music  has  in  all  respects  the  same  function  which  the 
drummers,  trumpeters,  and  fife-players  still  have  with  the 
army  and  with  public  processions.  Their  music  is  in  no 
wise  an  effect  of  the  sense  of  hearing  in  the  musical  sense 
of  the  word,  and  in  no  way  a  luxury  which  might  just  as 
well  be  wanting.  Attempt  to  arrange  a  march,  a  dance, 
or  a  public  procession  without  the  organising  force  of 
time  (in  the  musical  sense),  and  you  will  at  once  recognise 
how  great  and  important  this  force  is,  and  how  it  may  be 
brought  to  serve  practical  ends.  The  savages  themselves 
seem  to  be  conscious  of  the  importance  which  common 
action  has  for  their  life,  and  there  are  even  examples 
where  rhythmic  precision  in  executing  the  dances  stands 
in  a  direct  connection  with  the  preservation  of  life.  Boas 
relates  of  the  Kwakiutl  Indians  (British  Columbia)  :  ^  "  As 
chorus-singing  is  practised  at  all  festivals,  a  good  deal  of 
practice  is  necessary  before  an  artistic  effect  can  be  reached. 
The  Kwakiutl  are  very  particular  in  this  respect,  and  any 
mistake  made  by  a  singer  or  dancer  is  considered  oppro- 
brious. On  certain  occasions  the  dancer  who  makes  a 
mistake  is  killed ;  this  custom  reminds  us  of  the  ancient 
Mexicans."  I  think  modern  musicians  will  be  glad  of  the 
assurance  that  I  am  speaking  of  ancient  times  only. 

•^  F.  Boas,  /.  c,  p.  57. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  277 

However  this  may  be,  since  the  sense  of  time  (always 
of  course  in  the  musical  sense  of  the  word),  together  with 
rhythmical  movement,  does  alone  make  choral-dances  and 
games  possible,  seeing  that  this  sense  of  time  is  the 
beginning  of  music,  while  those  games  have  their  import- 
ance in  the  struggle  for  existence,  it  is  clear  how  the  same 
principle  which  we  find  all  through  nature  is  applicable 
to  the  development  of  musical  talent.  A  tribe  which  does 
not  practise  common  action,  which  does  not  prepare 
and  preserve  its  energy  by  war-games  will  have  less 
prospect  of  success  in  real  battle.  These  games  (choral- 
dances),  however,  are  possible  only  in  combination  with 
primitive  music,  and  this  circumstance  brings  all  musical 
ability  within  the  scope  of  the  law  of  natural  selection. 

I  know  well  that  the  validity  of  Darwin's  law  has  been 
denied  for  the  domain  of  ethics  and  art  (including,  of 
course,  music).  This  opposition  has  proceeded  from  men 
whose  epoch-making  importance  in  the  field  of  natural 
science  imposes  upon  me  the  duty  of  the  greatest  respect, 
while  at  the  same  time  it  necessitates  my  weighing  my 
conclusions  with  the  utmost  scrupulousness.  In  the 
following  I  confine  myself  entirely  to  the  domain  of  music, 
and  I  consider  myself  the  more  justified  in  doing  this  since 
the  historical  facts  with  which  ethnology  furnishes  us 
could  scarcely  be  taken  into  consideration  sufficiently, 
a  connected  treatment  of  the  same  not  existing.  Alfred 
Russell  Wallace,  in  discussing  the  development  of  our 
musical  faculties,  has  made  use  of  the  material  as  furnished 
by  the  English  Cyclopcedia,  which  in  my  opinion  is  not 
quite  satisfactory.  He  says  :  "  Among  the  lower  savages 
music,  as  we  understand  it,  hardly  exists,  though  they  all 
delight  in  rude  musical  sounds,  as  of  drums,  tom-toms,  or 
gongs;  and  they  also  sing  in  monotonous  chants.  Almost 
exactly  as  they  advance  in  general  intellect  and  in  the 
arts  of  social  life,  their  appreciation  of  music  appears  to 
rise  in  proportion  ;  and  we  find  among  them  rude  stringed 


278  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

instruments  and  whistles,  till,  in  Java,  we  have  regular 
bands  of  skilled  performers,  probably  the  successors  of 
Hindoo  musicians  of  the  age  before  the  Mohammedan 
Conquest.  The  Eg}'ptians  are  believed  to  have  been  the 
earliest  musicians,  and  from  them  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks 
no  doubt  derived  their  knowledge  of  the  art,  but  it  seems 
to  be  admitted  that  neither  the  latter  nor  the  Romans 
knew  anything  of  harmony  or  of  the  essential  features  of 
modern  music."  ^ 

I  believe  that  my  whole  book  forms  a  contradiction 
to  the  above  statements,  and  in  consequence  the  con- 
clusions would  also  have  to  be  changed.  In  reference  to 
the  latter  I  would  like  to  make  one  more  remark.  Wallace 
says:  "The  musical  abilit}-  is  undoubtedh',  in  its  lower 
forms,  less  uncommon  than  the  artistic  or  mathematical 
faculty,  but  it  still  differs  essentially  from  the  necessary 
or  useful  faculties  in  that  it  is  almost  entirely  wanting  in 
one-half  even  of  civilised  man ".-  To  be  sure  musical 
acti\ity  is  to-day  distributed  very  unevenly  among  mankind  ; 
but  originally  it  was  not  the  same  thing  as  to-day,  in  the 
climax  of  its  development.  In  fact  the  whole  tribe  par- 
ticipates in  the  musical  choral-dance  and  mimic  repre- 
sentation among  savages  :  we  have  never  heard  that 
certain  individuals  had  to  be  excluded  from  it  through 
lack  of  talent.  If  any  one  should  prove  awkward  in  these 
dances,  some  tribes,  as  we  have  heard,  cut  matters  short 
by  killing  him.  Purely  musical  composition  also  is  much 
more  general  than  to-day.  "  Among  the  Andamans  every 
one  composes  songs.  A  man  or  woman  would  be  thought 
very  little  of  who  could  not  do  so.  Even  small  children 
compose  their  own  songs."  "^  With  primitive  man  music, 
and  painting  and  sculpture  probably  as  well,  are  not 
purel}'  aesthetic  occupations  in  the  modern  sense,  they  are 

^  Wallace,  Davivin,  pp.  467,  468.  -Ibid.,  p.  471. 

3  Portman,  /.  c,  pp.  184,  185. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  279 

most  intimately  bound  up  with  practical  life-preserving 
and  life-continuing  activities,^  and  receive  only  gradually 
their  present  more  abstract  form.  And  therefore  a  law 
like  that  of  "  natural  selection  "  has  original  validity  here 
as  well,  while  it  is  less  easily  comprehensible  in  connection 
with  the  music  of  the  present  time  whose  conditions  of 
existence  have  become  too  complicated.  But  after  we 
have  recognised  the  full  scope  of  the  law,  the  spiritual  life 
of  man  has  been  brought  closer  to  that  of  the  animals, 
and  in  regard  to  the  continuity  of  both,  I  would  like  to 
add  a  few  more  words.  Wallace  has  destroyed  the  bridge 
between  the  spiritual  life  of  man  and  the  animals ;  a  deep 
cleft  separates  the  two.  Darwin  attempted  to  construct 
the  same  h\  trying  to  trace  a  number  of  the  psychological 
traits  of  man  in  the  animal  kingdom  ;  I  fear  that  some  of 
his  adherents  go  too  far  in  this,  and  that  they  approach 
too  closelv  upon  anthropomorphism.  The  hypothetic 
character  of  those  arguments  has  been  so  successfully 
shown  by  Prof.  Morgan  that  it  is  quite  sufficient  simply 
to  refer  to  them  ;  but  he  has  also  shown  that  one  is  not 
on  that  account  compelled  to  relinquish  the  connection 
between  the  spiritual  life  of  man  and  the  animals.  It  is 
therefore  my  opinion  that  it  is  much  easier  to  show  that 
primitive  man  still  is,  in  reference  to  his  mental  state,  an 
animal.  For  this  view  at  least  we  have  a  more  trust- 
worthy collection  of  empiric  facts  than  for  the  opinion 
that  the  animal  is  already  man,  or  that  there  is  no  con- 
nection between  the  spiritual  life  of  both.  To  furnish  this 
proof  for  the  whole  domain  of  psychic  activity  will  be  one 
of  the  tasks  of  ethnology. 

The   sense  of  beauty,   in   the   higher   meaning  of  the 

1  I  mention  this  because  L.  Morgan  has  said  {Aniiii.  Life  and  Intcll., 
p.  501):  "Natural  selection,  which  deals  with  practical  life-preserving  and 
life-continuing  activities,  has  little  to  say  to  the  aesthetic  activities,  music, 
painting,  sculpture  and  the  like".  If  only  music,  painting,  etc.,  were 
aesthetic  activities  among  primitive  man  ! 


200  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

term,  is  an  abstract  sensation  which  animals  do  not 
possess,  just  as  Httle  as  primitive  man  :  how  it  is  never- 
theless developed  in  man  in  the  course  of  time,  is  a  thing 
amply  illustrated  by  a  mass  of  reliable  observations.  For 
this  development  the  theory  of  Galton  and  Weismann 
seems,  in  my  eyes,  to  furnish  the  most  satisfactorv  expla- 
nation, especially  in  the  domain  of  music.  To  be  sure  I 
have  not  (as  I  have  before  mentioned)  the  impression  that 
music  is  to  be  considered  an  effect  of  the  sense  of  hearing, 
and  that  it  is  a  secondary  effect  not  originalh-  intended  by 
nature  ;  the  further  development,  however,  is,  in  my  eyes, 
only  explicable  as  direct  imitation  and  tradition.  Under 
such  conditions  it  is  in  no  wa}-  unlikelv  (what  ^^'eismann 
also  presumed)  that  we  civilised  nations,  and,  for  example, 
the  negroes,  receive  the  same  degree  of  musical  ability  by 
birth  and  yet  accomplish  such  different  ends.  Quite  apart 
from  the  training  of  our  individuality,  they  lack  examples 
and  the  social  necessity  of  coming  up  to  their  level. 
Neither  of  these  can  be  artificially  ingrafted  upon  their 
social  status,  and  therefore  they  are  pretty  well  lost  to 
musical,  and  probably  any  other  form  of,  culture. 

The  average  child  of  civilised  parents  does  not  neces- 
sarily come  into  the  world  with  a  higher  mental  equipment 
than  the  little  savage,  as  Mr.  Nisbet^  thinks.  Ne\erthe- 
less,  it  is  not  obliged  to  work  out  everything  de  novo  because 
it  comes  into  another  world,  into  a  world  with  a  settled 
tradition.  Into  this  the  child  gradually  grows,  and  out  of 
it  its  individuality  is  formed,  while  a  negro  boy  will  always 
have  the  impression  that  the  European  world  is  something 
strange  to  him,  not  made  by  his  equal.  His  ver}-  colour, 
if  not  the  general  behaviour  of  his  white  "friends,"  will 
soon  convince  him  of  this.  All  mental  progress  seems  to 
be  traceable  in  the  object  rather,  while  the  individuals 
have  remained  stationary.     More  highly  gifted  individuals 

1  Nisbet,  /.  c,  p.  viii. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  281 

are  the  outcome  of  sudden  favourable  combinations,  not 
the  cHmax  of  a  continual  line  leading  up  to  them. 

When  primitive  music  has  advanced  beyond  the  first 
purely  rhythmical  stage,  when  an  invention  of  melody 
takes  place  which  is  retained  in  memory,  it  has  often  been 
observed  that  these  short  musical  phrases  impress  just 
as  much  to-day  as  they  do  among  the  savages.  The  ad- 
vantage we  have  over  primitive  man  in  regard  to  music  is 
simply  that  we  are  able  to  work  up,  develop,  any  given 
theme,  while  the  former  spins  out  a  theme,  however  short 
it  may  be,  into  a  lengthy  piece  simply  through  endless 
repetitions.  This  art  of  working  up  a  given  theme  must 
be  acquired  by  each  individual  afresh  ;  the  capacity  for  it 
is  not  a  whit  greater  in  the  present  generation  than  during 
former  times.  To  be  sure  it  is  probable  that  we  learn 
quicker,  but  only  because  we  have  more  numerous  and 
better  patterns,  and  because  in  our  study  we  save  ourselves 
the  trouble  of  scholastic  by-ways,  in  learning  which  past 
generations  have,  through  want  of  experience,  wasted  un- 
necessary time  and  energy. 

On  the  other  hand,  those  of  the  savage  tribes  which 
are  really  musical  comprehend  our  music,  at  least  that  of 
a  simple  character ;  that  means,  to  the  same  degree  that 
our  peasants  do.  It  is  also  astonishing  how  quickly 
Negro  Hottentot  and  Malay  orchestras  grasp  European 
dance  music  and  play  it  immediately,  by  hearing,  in  the 
orchestra. 

In  the  drawings  done  by  savages  one  can  trace  exactly 
the  same  mistakes  and  peculiarities  as  with  our  children.^ 
I  do  not  doubt  that  this  will  in  time  be  proved  by  ethnology 
more  completely  than  I  am  able  to  do  within  the  limits 
of  this  abstract.     But  I  might  mention  that  we  are  able 

^With  perfect  justice  Hirth  (/.  c,  vol.  ii.  p.  583)  has  expressly  not 
traced  the  lack  of  perspective  in  the  disposition  of  a  child's  drawing  to 
atavism,  but  has  designated  it  as  a  peculiarity  of  the  spirit  of  the  nursery. 
Examples  of  savage  drawings  in  Andree,  Ethn.  Par.,  p.  258  (Neue  Folge,  p.  56). 


282  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

to  observe  the  same  in  the  compositions  of  children,  or 
more  properly  in  the  musical  invention  of  children,  even 
up  to  the  time  of  boyhood  or  girlhood,  and  all  this  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  the  child  unconsciously  undergoes  even  in 
tender  }'outh  the  influence  of  modern  music. 

The  origin  and  development  of  painting  seems  also 
to  come  under  the  influence  of  natural  selection.  Thus 
the  most  important  and  most  original  products  of  Dyaks' 
painting  are  the  bizarre  decorations  of  their  shields.  They 
were  bizarre  and  grotesque  in  order  to  frighten  the  enemy 
against  whom  they  were  held.  (The  ancient  Greek  paint- 
ing of  the  Gorgo  Medusa  head  originally  had  the  same 
meaning,  viz.,  to  frighten  the  deit}'.)  The  fantastic 
demons  of  the  Dyaks  were  the  result  of  a  competition  in 
the  struggle  for  life,  which  sought  to  constantly  increase 
by  new  decorations  the  dread  of  the  defending  shields. 
Other  ornaments  were   originally  signs  of  property,  and 


We  also  have  the  best  of  reasons  to  suppose  that 
among  the  "faculties'"  of  the  human  mind  the  so-called 
musical  faculty  at  least  has  not  been  heightened  in  course 
of  time,  and  that  all  progress  has  simply  been  brought 
about  by  objective  heredity.  Long  before  this  could  take 
place  the  practice  of  music  was  so  intimately  connected 
with  life-continuing  and  life-preserving  activities  that  the 
law  of  natural  selection  held  good  even  in  the  domain  of 
music. 

A  mere  psychological  consideration  of  the  case  will 
lead  us  to  a  similar  result.  I  venture  to  say  that  the  old 
doctrine  of  separate  powers,  capabilities  (Vermogen,  as 
the  German  psychologists  formerly  used  to  call  it)  in  the 
human  mind  has  generally  been  abandoned  by  modern 
psychologists.     There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  independent 

^  Hein,  Techn.  Kiuistc  d.  Dayaks,  vi.  3,  p.  203. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  283 

musical  ability,  or  musical  sense,  distincth'  separable  from 
other  faculties.  If  this  is  so,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that 
a  special  musical  faculty  is  developed  under  a  special  law. 
The  human  mind  is  one  whole,  equally  subject  to  one  and 
the  same  natural  influences.  More  than  that,  mind  and 
body  are  one  whole.  Where  is  the  physiologist  or  physicist 
who  could  draw  a  distinct  line  between  a  mere  physical 
movement,  a  reflex  action,  and  an  intelligent  will  ?  Who 
can  say  up  to  what  point  the  mere  corporal  faculty  extends, 
and  from  where  the  mental  one  begins  ?  How  can  we 
say  then  that  our  brain  is  subject  to  the  natural  law  of 
natural  selection  and  our  ideas  to  supernatural  or  any 
other  influence  ?  How  can  we  venture  to  apply  to  this 
one  whole  of  human  being  different  influences  and  say, 
for  instance,  that  one  part  is  developed  under  natural 
laws,  another  under  supernatural,  again  another  under 
direct  divine  agency  ?  how  can  we  say  that  the  one  is 
a  primary  effect,  the  other  a  secondary  one,  and  that 
among  all  there  is  a  special  compartment  somewhere  in 
the  brain  carefully  locked  up  and  called  the  musical  faculty, 
which  is  preserved  under  the  particular  care  of — we  do  not 
know  what  ? 

As  there  is  no  special  musical  facult}'(the  term  faculty 
has  always  been  used  like  the  term  soul  for  the  shortness 
of  expression)  we  must  again  remember  that  we  said  it 
was  not  the  musical  talent  alone  which  made  the  composer. 
The  artist  is  the  man  whose  total  energy,  interest,  and 
labour,  whose  feelings  and  ambition  are  entiiely  given  up 
to  the  one  artistic  object,  whatever  it  may  be.  If  this 
has  happened  we  speak  of  a  peculiar  faculty  for  this  object 
in  a  certain  man,  but  this  so-called  "  faculty"  is  nothing 
but  the  resulting  tendency  of  our  mind  as  a  whole  which 
turns  in  a  certain  direction  under  certain  favourable  cir- 
cumstances. And  so  the  "musical  faculty"  too  is  the 
end  of  a  certain  disposition  of  our  mind,  towards  which 
all   the   so-called  faculties  tend,  not   a  separate  starting- 


284  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

point  from  which  they  arise.  Of  course,  some  organic 
structures  may  be  more  favourable  to  a  certain  end,  under 
certain  external  circumstances,  but  we  shall  never  be  able 
to  find  a  unique  source  for  any  artistic  disposition.  So  it 
may  happen  that  the  mental  disposition,  say  of  a  great 
politician,  would  have  been  much  more  favourable  to 
artistic  development,  than  that  of  many  actual  artists, 
had  he  been  placed  under  the  most  appropriate  external 
conditions.  This  would  not  be  possible  if  there  were  such 
a  thing  as  a  peculiar  artistic  faculty.  It  is  mental  strength 
in  general  which  characterises  the  great  man  of  the  future, 
and  nobody  knows  in  which  direction  it  will  concentrate 
itself  at  last.  Thus  the  German  poet  Victor  Scheffel 
intended  to  become  a  painter  at  first,  until  one  da}-,  quite 
accidentally,  his  talent  for  poetry  was  discovered  by  a 
lady  friend  and  then  turned  to  account  by  himself.  The 
painter  Fritz  Uhde  felt  himself  so  entirely  in  the  wrong 
place  when  he  first  frequented  the  painting  academy  in 
Dresden  that  he  left  it  and  became  an  officer.  Only  later 
on  he  took  up  his  former  profession  again,  recognising  it, 
at  the  same  time,  as  the  most  appropriate  to  his  talent. 
Rousseau  considered  himself  a  composer  only,  and  wrote 
his  philosophical  and  educational  works,  merely  occasion- 
ally, as  an  occupation  of  secondary  importance.  Had  not 
his  opera  "  Devin  du  Village "  had  such  an  immense 
success,  he  would  probably  have  devoted  himself  entirely 
to  philosoph}',  and  we  should  not  know  anything  of  his 
compositions.  And  to  what  did  he  owe  this  success — 
to  favourable  circumstances  or  to  the  merits  of  the  com- 
positions ?  Merits  ?  The  present  generation  knows 
Rousseau  as  philosopher  only,  and  I  dare  sav  there 
will  be  many  people  who  never  knew  that  Rousseau  com- 
posed at  all.  Goethe  once  seriously  thought  of  becoming 
a  painter.  Zelter,  his  contemporary,  was  destined  to 
become  a  bricklayer  like  his  father,  and  devoted  himself 
to  music  comparatively  late. 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT,  285 

These  examples  tend  to  show  that  general  strength 
and  greatness  of  mind  assumes  that  peculiar  shape  which 
in  course  of  time  proves  itself  as  the  most  effective  in  the 
outside  world  and  the  most  appropriate  to  the  circum- 
stances, or  as  the  naturalist  would  say  in  plainer  language, 
it  assumes  the  form  most  useful  to  the  individual.  This 
view  is  not  at  all  in  opposition  to  the  fact  that  great 
characters  assert  themselves  in  spite  of  their  disregarding 
entirely  all  the  surroundings  they  have  to  live  in.  Thus 
one  may  say  Richard  Wagner  would  have  been  more 
successful  in  the  beginning  of  his  career  if  he  had  written 
in  the  customary  easy-going  style  of  the  Italian  opera, 
and  with  the  pomposity  of  Meyerbeer,  in  favour  with  the 
masses.  Precisely  so.  In  the  beginning  he  would  have 
been  more  successful,  but  he  knew  that  musical  develop- 
ment ought  to  turn  in  quite  another  direction  which  he 
pretended  to  foresee  in  the  future  ;  and  with  regard  to  this 
future  of  music,  which  would  then  prove  still  more  favour- 
able to  him  than  the  success  of  the  ordinary  musician 
of  his  time,  he  wrote  what  he  actually  called  "  Zukunfts- 
musik  ■".  In  his  earlier  days,  however,  when  his  operas 
"  Das  Liebesverbot  "  and  "  Die  Feen  "  had  proved  failures, 
he  did  write  in  accordance  with  the  taste  of  the  masses, 
like  Meyerbeer,  and  brought  out  his  "  Rienzi  '\  But  by 
this  time  there  happened  to  be  too  many  competitors  in 
this  domain,  so  he  remained  unnoticed,  and  as  there  was 
nothing  to  be  hoped  from  the  present  he  wrote  for  the 
future. 

Thus  it  is  just  the  example  of  Wagner  which  at  first 
sight  seems  to  tell  against  the  theory  of  usefulness  in  art, 
but  which  at  bottom  is  eloquent  in  favour  of  it.  By  this 
theory  I  do  not  mean  to  degrade  the  action  of  the  artist. 
The  word  "  use  "  can  be  taken  in  a  very  ideal  sense.  He 
who  pretends  to  despise  use  is  himself  too  low  to  conceive 
a  higher  meaning  of  it.  If  to  some  friendship  is  more 
useful  than  gain,  if  the  law  of  usefulness  has  produced  all 


286  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

the  beauty  in  the  world,  the  grandeur  of  the  sk\-  as  well 
as  the  tender  blossoms  of  the  earth,  then  it  will  also  be 
effective  enough  to  form  the  highest  artistic  ideals  the 
human  mind  is  capable  of. 

Which  artistic  direction  will  be  the  most  useful  for  a 
great  mind  to  take  is  difficult  to  predict.  It  depends  upon 
custom,  countries,  times,  even  upon  the  fashion.  There 
ha\e  been  centuries  of  poets,  of  painters,  sculptors,  archi- 
tects, while  we  ourselves  seem  to  live  in  the  centurv  of 
musicians,  I  mean  of  poetical,  intelligent  musicians  of  the 
pattern  of  \\'agner.  How  such  changes  in  artistic  tend- 
ency are  brought  about,  how  they  are  felt  at  once  by 
millions  of  people  on  different  continents,  and  wh\-  they 
are  responded  to,  I  cannot  say.  But  that  they  are  most 
effective  everybody  seems  to  be  aware  of. 

So  much  of  the  past.  But  how  will  future  events 
shape  themselves  ?  This  question  has  frequently  been 
broached  by  musicians,  especiall\-  when  they  found  them- 
selves face  to  face  with  a  phenomenon  so  singular  and 
unexpected  as  Wagner.  In  their  complete  surprise  and 
passionate  enthusiasm,  which  can  easily  be  comprehended, 
they  have  confessed  as  their  sincere  opinion  that  in  him 
not  only  music  but  the  whole  world  in  general  had  reached 
its  climax.  From  this  height  all  things  were  expected  to 
decline,  and  nothing  perfectly  new  could  in  their  opinion 
be  created.  This  truly  Chinese  view  has,  however, 
hindered  the  development  of  music  on  countless  occasions, 
and  has  caused  such  severe  struggles  as  have  accompanied 
the  appearance  of  original  geniuses  like  Berlioz  and 
Wagner.  The  less  are  their  adherents  in  their  turn 
justified  in  adopting  the  same  principle,  which  in  the  case 
of  the  "conservatives"  they  justly  censured.  None  but 
the  uninitiated  could  arrive  at  the  above  conclusion  (and 
they  will  probably  continue  to  do  so),  for  any  one  knowing 
the  prospects  of  music  in  the  future  would  already  be  half 
a  composer ;  to  theoretically  expound  what  this  future  of 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  287 

music  may  be  none,  not  even  the  artist,  is  able  to  do  ;  the 
product  of  his  genius,  the  work  of  art,  alone  can  and  will 
re^■eal  it.  Reasoning  in  regard  to  the  future  of  art  is 
futile,  but  imagination  has  for  a  period  of  live  thousand 
years  continued  to  produce  new  works  of  art,  and  there  is 
no  reason  why  all  this  should  ha\-e  come  to  an  end  in  the 
year  1883.  On  the  contrary,  this  assumption  seems  to 
my  mind  both  narrow-minded  and  unfounded.  Unfounded 
because  there  is  no  absolute  standard  of  beauty,  for  we, 
with  our  purely  subjective  and  individual  conception  of 
art,  should  never  make  the  preposterous  assertion  that  in 
this  way  and  no  other  can  art  attain  to  absolute  perfection. 
A  work  of  art  is  made  for  us  and  is  consequently  subject 
to  all  changes  in  and  through  us. 

/\n  experience  of  my  own  has  always  been  to  me  an 
appropriate  example  of  how  opinion  may  change  in  course 
of  time.  My  teacher  of  counterpoint  once  took  up  Bach's 
mass  in  B  minor  and  said  :  "  In  this  work  is  comprehended 
all  musical  wisdom,  beyond  it  we  can  never  go".  From 
the  point  of  view  of  musical  labour  and  polish,  or  of  the 
art  exercised  in  execution,  he  was  no  doubt  right.  But 
there  is  still  another  point  of  view,  that  of  colouring  and 
emotional  element,  and  this  has  found  grander  and  more 
eloquent  expression  in  Wagner  than  in  any  other  com- 
poser. Incidentally  I  may  mention  that  this  constitutes, 
in  my  opinion,  Wagner's  supreme  mastership.  Nobody 
can  say  which  point  of  view  coming  generations  will  take, 
for  we  are  not  the  coming  generation,  and  only  in  the 
divinely  inspired  artist  will  it  be  anticipated. 

The  above  negative  decision  in  regard  to  the  future  of 
art  is  not,  however,  free  from  a  certain  narrowness  of  view 
which  has  excluded  the  consideration  of  the  long  evolution 
of  music,  and  especially  of  dramatic  music.  W^hat  a 
length  of  time  has  not  elapsed  since  the  first  attempt  to 
represent  the  events  of  chase  and  war  before  the  assembled 
company  in  order  to  induce  it  to  participate  in  common 


288  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

action.  How  long  a  time  did  not  elapse  before  these 
primitive  dances  and  animal  pantomimes  could  have 
become  customary,  and  before  their  old  stereotyped  form 
could  at  last  lead  to  innovations  and  improvements.  Let 
us  not  forget  that  those  dances  occurred  among  people 
who  in  every  other  respect  have  not  advanced  beyond  the 
civilisation  of  the  stone  period.  In  comparison  with  them 
a  dramatic  festival  as  advanced  and  accomplished  as  the 
corrobberree  or  the  kuri-dance  in  Australia  represents  an 
epoch  in  literature,  an  artistic  advancement  of  centuries. 
And  how  simple,  how  childish  this  drama  appears  w^hen 
compared  with  the  ancient  Indian  drama,  of  which  we  are 
told  that  only  in  later  stages  was  the  customary  song 
replaced  b}-  spoken  words.  The  tropic  glow,  the  fiery 
passion  of  a  Sakuntala  designate  a  height  of  perfection 
which  again  is  separated  by  centuries  from  the  epoch  of 
the  corrobberree.  And  still,  what  is  this  when  compared 
with  the  drama  of  Pericles'  time,  or  of  the  Roman  theatre, 
both  of  which  have  so  many  characteristics  in  common 
with  modern  dramatic  art.  But  this  is  the  period  with 
which  in  so  many  cases  our  historical  investigations  used 
to  commence,  while  for  the  times  preceding  we  had 
merely  a  geological  interest.  What  changes  had  not 
occurred  in  the  drama  up  to  the  Roman  period,  and  what 
changes  were  still  to  come.  Lost  in  the  mental  darkness 
of  the  middle  ages,  it  nevertheless  at  last  found  the 
saving  path  from  the  grimacing,  immoral  derivations 
of  the  old  mysteries  to  the  bright  splendour  of  the 
artistic  stage,  from  mysterious  choirs  and  disreputable 
cloister-alleys  to  the  open  and  unreserved  tribunal  of  the 
people,  to  those  boards  that  represent  the  world,  a  free 
play,  inspired  as  once  before  by  love  of  mankind  and 
taken  from  its  varying  fates.  Now  the  first  oratorios 
appeared,  now  the  first  operas  were  produced,  small  in  the 
beginning  and  diffident,  but  soon  centres  of  interest  for 
the    entire    spiritual   life    of  society.      On   their   account 


HEREDITY    AND    DEVELOPMENT.  289 

parties  were  formed,  on  their  account  the  whole  of  Paris 
was  once  roused  to  passionate  enthusiasm  and  fierce 
hatred  ;  indeed,  in  the  days  of  Gluck  and  Piccini  even 
poHtics  were  forgotten  for  a  time,  so  entirely  absorbed 
were  the  parties  in  the  musical  questions  of  the  day. 

But  these  miracles  know  no  limits.  The  stage  is 
animated  with  new  characters  ;  the  figure  of  stone  appears 
in  the  gloom  of  night  ;  in  dungeons  deep  a  prisoner  awaits 
the  blessed  hour  of  liberty  ;  elves  flit  through  the  air  ;  the 
spirit  of  the  earth  leaves  with  aching  heart  the  deceitful 
love-phantom  of  human  life  ;  the  Italian  carnival  crosses 
the  stage  in  wanton  revelry  ;  till  at  last  the  daughters  of 
the  Rhine  rise  from  the  depths  of  the  holy  river,  Sigfried's 
horn  resounds,  and  Walhall,  the  resplendent  seat  of  the 
gods,  shines  in  subHme  grandeur. 

This  is  for  the  present  the  last  stage  in  the  long  line 
of  evolution,  more  varied  and  more  eloquent  in  the  history 
of  the  musical  drama  than  in  any  other  domain  of  human 
accomplishments.  A  review  of  this  domain  of  our  mental 
activity  betrays  as  much  vital  creative  power  as  it  reveals 
the  prospect  of  new  and  glorious  blossoms,  and  an  in- 
satiable desire  on  our  part  to  enjoy  them  in  their  full 
splendour  and  their  eternal  youth. 

Such  at  least  is  the  conclusion  to  which  the  theoretical 
observer  may  come ;  to  everything  else  the  creative  artist 
will  return  answer. 


SUMMARY. 

I.  A  general  vieic  of  primitive  music  in  Africa,  Australia,  the  South 
Sea  Islands,  Asia,  and  America. 

A  general  view  of  primitive  music  shows  us  that  in  the  most 
primitive  state  the  main  constituent  of  music  has  always  been  rhythm, 
while  melody  has  remained  an  accessory.  At  the  same  time  music 
is  associated  with  dancing,  and  in  dance-music  the  idea  is  to  excite 
the  performer  and  to  fatigue  him,  even  to  exhaustion.  The  musical 
dance-chorus  is  of  a  social  character;  music  keeps  the  company 
together  and  enables  them  to  act  simultaneously. 

II.  Singers  and  composers  in  primitive  times  {the  human  voice). 
There   was    a  class    of   professional   composers    and    singers   in 

primitive  times  which  was  highly  flattered  and  well  rewarded  for 
the  services  rendered  to  the  public,  but  at  the  same  time  was  very 
little  esteemed  from  a  social  point  of  view.  Its  power  and  influence 
upon  the  masses  was  well  known,  and  was  very  often  made  use  of 
by  the  chiefs  in  their  endeavours  both  to  rule  the  people  and  to  keep 
up  their  own  reputation.  The  mode  of  singing  all  over  the  savage 
world  is  best  characterised  by  the  words,  the  louder  it  is  the  more 
beautiful,  the  strength  of  the  voice  and  the  physical  perseverance  of 
the  performer  being  chiefly  exhibited.  Men  and  women  sing  at  such 
a  high  pitch  (the  former  frequently  in  falsetto)  as  to  have  given  rise 
to  the  presumption  that  the  human  voice  must  formerly  have  been 
higher.  This,  however,  cannot  be  proved  by  ethnological  facts,  and 
the  high  pitch  is  merely  due  to  the  great  excitement  with  which 
savages  sing.  Women  sing  in  many  cases  better  and  more  frequently 
than  the  men  ;  there  are  poets  and  composers  amongst  them. 

III.  Instruments. 

The  oldest  instrument  we  know  of  is  the  pipe,  specimens  of 
which  have  been  found  among  relics  coeval  with  the  Irish  elk 
(cervus  alces).  It  seems  to  have  been  originally  an  ornament  consisting 
of  the  bone  of  a  dead  animal  or  a  slain  enemy  perforated  with  a  hole 
so  as  to  be  hung  up  by  a  string  and  worn.  Similar  bones  are  used 
(291) 


2g2  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

as  musical  instruments  and  played  upon  by  Maoris  and  Indian 
tribes.  The  next  oldest  instrument  appears  to  be  the  gong  (or 
sounding  stone-plate).  The  drum,  in  the  comparatively  elaborate 
and  enormous  shape  savages  know,  is  by  no  means  the  most  primi- 
tive instrument,  as  is  commonly  supposed,  although  drumming  with 
sticks  or  on  stretched  deer-skins,  or  the  clapping  of  hands  and  stamp- 
ing of  feet,  was  evidently  regarded  as  the  simplest  means  to  mark 
the  rhythm,  and  was,  too,  the  earliest  form  of  musical  accompani- 
ment. Bowed  instruments  frequently  occur  among  primitive  tribes 
all  over  the  world,  but  it  is  difficult  to  decide  whether  European 
instruments  influenced  their  construction  or  not.  At  any  rate  the 
supposed  Indian  origin  of  bowed  instruments  has  no  better  foundation 
than  any  hypothetical  African  origin  would  have.  Other  instruments, 
such  as  tubes,  trumpets,  bells,  castanets,  rattles,  the  marimba,  gourah, 
and  all  sorts  of  stringed  instruments  (of  savages  only),  have  been 
described,  their  chief  peculiarities  and  distribution  given. 

The  orchestra,  especially  the  military  band,  seems  to  be  a  very 
early  institution,  arising  immediately  from  the  social  character  of 
primitive  music. 

IV.   The  basis  of  oiiv  modern  musical  system. 

(c/)  Scale.  The  supposition  of  the  older  music  writers  that  the 
pentatonic  scale  is  the  earliest  known  cannot  be  maintained  in  the 
face  of  ethnological  research.  Old  Egjptian  flutes  dating  from  the 
year  3000  b.c.  (the  bronze  age)  have  a  complete  diatonic  scale.  The 
above-mentioned  prehistoric  pipes  have  the  first  four  tones  of  the 
diatonic  scale,  that  is  to  say,  the  first  of  the  equal  halves  of  this 
scale.  Diatonic  intervals  frequently  occur  on  primitive  instruments, 
side  by  side  with  other  instruments  with  the  pentatonic  or  any 
intervals.  From  this  we  may  conclude  that  Helmholtz's  supposition, 
that  our  present  diatonic  system  is  an  artistic  invention,  the  result 
of  musical  speculation,  does  not  hold  good,  since  men  of  the  bronze 
age  and  of  the  reindeer  period  could  hardly  have  invented  a  musical 
system.     This  system  must  have  come  about  in  a  more  natural  way. 

{b)  Harmony.  As  soon  as  music  passes  the  mere  rhythmical  stage 
the  lowest  races  in  the  scale  of  man  begin  to  sing  in  different  parts, 
in  intervals  as  well  as  with  a  bass  accompaniment  {e.g.,  Hottentots, 
New  Zealanders).  Many  savages  tune  their  instruments  together  in 
harmonious  chords  and  in  accordance  with  their  voices  ;  indeed,  the 
quartette  form  frequently  occurs  in  savage  instrumental  music.  Some 
tribes  easily  put  a  second  part  to  any  European  tune  they  hear  for 
the  first  time.    Thus  harmony  does  not  seem  to  be  so  new  an  invention 


SUMMARY.  293 

as  is  commonly  supposed,  nor  is  it  confined  to  European  races.  These 
facts  again  considerably  alter  the  position  of  harmony  in  our  musical 
system,  which  might  be  as  old  as  melody,  especially  considering  the 
original  poverty  of  the  latter. 

(c)  Major  and  minor  key.  Both  keys  occur  among  primitive  races, 
and  do  not  seem  to  be  in  any  causal  connection  with  the  mood  and 
disposition  of  mind.  The  merriest  people  sing  their  merriest  words  in 
minor  keys,  and,  as  some  tribes  sing  in  harmony  as  well,  minor  chords 
occasionally  occur.  Thus  it  does  not  seem  to  be  more  difficult  to  sing 
in  the  minor  key  than  in  the  major. 

V.  Physical  and  psychical  influence  of  music. 

Savages  are  highly  susceptible  to  music,  which  excites  them  in 
the  highest  imaginable  degree.  Their  songs  sometimes  even  lead  to 
war.  In  some  cases  music  causes  physical  pain,  and  makes  men 
sick  and  unfitted  for  work  for  days  together.  Savages  know  this 
power  of  sounds,  and  apply  it — as  they  think — with  success  in  cases 
of  illness. 

VI.  Poetry  and  music. 

Vocal  music  does  not  always  imply  poetry  as  well  as  music,  but 
in  many  cases  music  only,  meaningless  words  serving  the  purpose 
of  articulation.  The  subjects  are  extremely  simple,  taken  from  events 
of  every-day  life,  expressed  in  a  few  short  sentences,  and  repeated 
over  and  over  again  for  hours.  More  elaborate  poetry  is  sometimes 
sung  in  a  kind  of  recitative.  Some  tribes  have  a  so-called  "speech- 
song". 

VII.  Dancing  and  music. 

Dancing  and  music  are  in  fact  one  act  of  expression,  not  merely 
an  occasional  union  like  poetry  and  music.  There  is  no  dance 
without  music.  Such  dances  consist  of  all  the  movements  necessary 
in  the  struggle  for  life  (war-dance,  hunting-dance).  In  deer-dances 
the  imitations  of  the  habits  of  animals  are  very  striking,  and  always 
true  to  nature.  Women  are  the  most  persistent  dancers,  and,  as 
they  are  the  better  singers  as  well,  primitive  music  owes  its  support 
to  a  great  extent  to  women. 

VIII.  Primitive  drama  {pantomime,  opera). 

In  addition  to  the  above  performances,  songs  are  introduced 
which  enable  the  performers  to  make  a  more  complicated  action 
clear  to  the  audience.  The  subjects  are  comic  as  well  as  tragic, 
in  the  latter  of  which  some  tribes  seem  to  take  peculiar  pleasure. 


294  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Dramatic  or  operatic  performances  are  a  national  festival,  in  which 
very  often  different  tribes— even  enemies — take  part,  all  rivalry  being 
laid  aside  during  the  festival. 

IX.  Origin  of  music. 

From  the  character  of  primitive  music,  as  exhibited  by  the 
musical  practice  of  savages,  I  venture  to  conclude  that  the  origin  of 
music  is  to  be  sought  in  a  general  desire  for  rhythmical  exercise,  and 
that  the  "  time-sense"  is  the  psychical  source  from  which  it  arises. 
The  rhythm  through  itself  leads  us  to  certain  tones  (and  consequently 
tunes)  by  which  rhythmical  periods  are  better  marked,  and  the 
whole  movement  becomes  more  distinct.  I  do  not  agree  with  Darwin's 
theory,  for,  although  the  production  of  tones  may  be  traced  as  far 
back  as  to  the  bird's  "  song,"  yet  we  have  no  exact  proof  of  the  exist- 
ence of  so  many  complex  psychical  actions  in  animals,  as  the  term 
"music"  seems  to  imply.  (In  addition  to  this  a  description  of  the 
tone-production  in  the  animal  kingdom  is  given,  with  an  investigation 
into  the  character  of  the  adequate  organs.)  According  to  Mr.  Spencer, 
music  arises  from  the  natural  melody  of  emotional  speech.  Smce, 
however,  the  most  primitive  music  is  no  melody,  but  noise  reduced  to 
time,  it  can  hardly  be  the  direct  offspring  of  emotional  speech.  The 
so-called  "  recitative,"  moreover,  is  not  the  earliest  still  less  the  only 
form  of  primitive  music  ;  it  is  the  outcome  of  music  united  with 
poetry,  where  the  language  is  sufficiently  developed  to  allow  of 
connected  stories.  Even  in  these  cases  the  original  chorus-dances 
occur  side  by  side  with  the  recitative.  (For  other  reasons  against 
Darwin's  and  Spencer's  theory  on  the  origin  of  music  see  the  book.) 
A  collection  of  the  earliest  tales  on  the  origin  of  music  follows  as  an 
appendix  to  this  chapter. 

X.  Heredity  and  development  in  music. 

Accepting  Mr.  Galton's  and  Weismann's  theory  of  the  non- 
heredity  of  acquired  variations,  I  will  try  to  explain  the  progress  in 
music  by  tradition  and  imitation.  This  alone  would  seem  to  account 
for  the  rapid  progress  of  music  during  the  present  century,  and 
especially  during  the  last  thirty  years,  in  which  (considering  the 
short  time  of  one  generation)  no  heredity,  nor  elimination,  nor 
organic  combination  can  possibly  have  taken  place  at  all. 

Primitive  music  is  not  at  all  an  abstract  art,  but  (taken  in 
connection  with  dance  and  pantomime)  is  a  part  of  the  necessaries 
of  life  (war  and  hunting),  for  which  it  seems  to  prepare,  or  to  main- 
tain our  strength  and  skill  during  time  of  peace.  Primitive  music, 
as  it  is  {i.e.,  keeping  in  time),  is  an  organising  power  for  the  masses, 


SUMMARY.  295 

the  tie  which  enables  the  tribe  to  act  as  one  body.  It  facilitates 
association  in  acting.  Tribes  which  know  how  to  keep  time,  which  are 
accustomed  to  play  at  war  and  at  hunting,  associate  more  easily,  act 
better  in  case  of  need,  and,  since  association  accounts  for  something 
in  the  struggle  for  life,  such  tribes  are  better  prepared  for  it ;  for  this 
purpose  the  musical  faculty  is  developed  and  trained.  Thus  the  law 
of  natural  selection  holds  good  in  explaining  the  origin  and  develop- 
ment of  music. 


AUTHORITIES  QUOTED. 

(The  numbers  in  brackets  refer  to  the  page  of  this  book  where  the  work 
is  quoted.) 

Aalst  (T.  a.  van),  Chinese  Music,  Shanghai,  London,  1884  (16) 

Adair  (James),  The  History  of  the  American  Indians,  London,  1775  (173) 

Addison   (Lancelot),  An   Account   of  West    Barbary   (printed  Oxf.,   1671), 

Pinkcrt.  Collect.,  vol.  xv.  (14,  129,  211) 
Adelburg  (A.  von),  Entgegnung  auf  Liszt's  Des  Bohemiens,  Pest,  1859  (63) 
Albertis  (Luigi  Maria),  New  Guinea,  2  vols.,  London,  1880  (28,  no) 
Allen  (Grant),  Physiological  Esthetics,  London,  1877  (233) 
Allen  (William  Francis),  Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States.     Edited  by  Allen, 

C.  P.  Ware,  L.  M.  Garrison,  New  York,  1867  (61,  175) 
Allgemeine  Musikalische  Zeitung,  Leipzig 
Ambros  (August  Wilhelm),  Geschichte  der  Musik,  5  vols.,  Breslau,  Leipzig, 

1862-1882  (58) 
American  Journal  of  Psychology  (The),  edited  by  G.  J.  Hall,  Baltimore 
American  Naturalist,  Philadelphia 

Amyot  (Joseph),  Memoire  sur  la  musique  des  Chinois,  Paris,  1779  (16) 
Anales  del  Ministerio  de  Fomento,  Mexico,  1854  (138) 
Anderson  (John),  Mandalay  to  Momien,  London,  1876  (16) 
Andersson  (C.  J.),  Lake  Ngami,  London,  1S86  (123,  124) 
Andree  (Richard),  Das  Amur  Gebiet,  Leipzig,  1867  (100,  120) 
Ethnogr.   Parallelen   Stuttgart,   1878,   Neue   Folge,  Leipzig,   18S9   (84, 

281) 
Angas  (G.  F.),  Polynesia,  London,  1866  (87,  93,  204) 
Savage  Life  and  Scenes  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  2  vols.,  London, 

1847  (38,  83,  93,  loi,  107,  217,  218,  223) 
Angelo  (Michael),  Carli  (Denis  de),  A  Voyage  to  Congo,  i6'?6,  1667,  Pinkcrt _ 

Collect.,  xvi.  (99,  107,  114,  117,  143) 
Annalen  des  k.  k.  Naturhistorischen  Hofmuseums,  Wien 
Antananarivo  Annual  and  Madagascar  Magazine  (The),  Antananarivo 
Appun  (Carl  Friedrich),  Unter  den  Tropen,  2  vols.,  Jena,  1871  (54) 
Archaeological  Journal  (The),  London 
Archiv  fiir  mikroskopische  Anatomic,  Bonn 
Archiv  fiir  Ohrenheilkunde,  Leipzig 

Ashe  (Thomas),  Travels  in  America  1806,  London,  1809  (48) 
(297) 


298  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Astley  (Thomas),  A  New  General  Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels,  4  vols., 
London,  1745  (8,  16,  65,  86,  88,  104,  117,  118,  125) 

Atkinson  (T.  W.),  Travels  in  the  Regions  of  the  Upper  and  Lower  Amoor, 
London,  i860  (23) 

Ausland  (Das),  Stuttgart  Augsburg 

Avezac  (M.  d'),  Notice  sur  le  pays  et  le  Peuple  de  Yebous  en  Afrique,  in 
Memoire  de  la  Soc.  EthnoL,  torn.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p.  89  (gg,  131) 

Azara  (Don  Felix  de),  Reisen  in  dem  siidlichen  Amerika,  1781-1801,  in  Jour- 
nal f.  L.  nnd  S.,  p.  74,  Bd.  vi.  (55) 

Baker  (Sir  S.  W.),  Ismailia :  A  Narrative  of  the  Exped.  to  Central  Africa, 
2nd  edit.,  London,  1879  (9) 

The  Albert  Nyanza,  Great  Basin  of  the  Nile,  and  Explor.  of  the  Nile 

Sources,  2  vols.,  London,  1866  (i8g,  igg) 
Baker  (Theodor),  Uber  die  Musik  der  Nordamerikanischen  Wilden,  Leipzig, 

1882  (76,  92,  95,  96,  138,  142,  143,  151,  160,  161,  173,  186,  195) 
Balfour  (Edward),  The  Cyclopedia  of  India  and  Eastern  and  Southern  Asia, 

London,  1885  (142) 
Balfour  (Henry),  The  old  British  "  Picborn  "  or  "  Hornpipe  "  and  its  Affinities, 

in  Anth.  yourn.,  vol.  xx.  p.  142  (98) 
Bancroft  (Hubert  Howe),  The  Native  Races  of  the  Pacific  States  of  North 

America,  5  vols..  New  York  and  Cambridge,  1875-76  (47,  48,  49,  50, 

75,  76,  83,  88,  93,  97,  103,  109,  III,  116,  117,  118,  138,  143,  146,  172, 

208,  212,  213,  2ig,  226,  227,  261) 
Barker-Webb  (Ph.),  Berthelot  (Sabin),  Histoire  naturelle  des  lies  Canaries, 

3  vols.,  Paris,  1835-49  (190) 
Baron  (S.,  native  of  Tonqueen),  A  Description  of  the  Kingdom  of  Tonqueen, 

Pinkcrt.  Collect.,  vol.  ix.  (137,  207) 
Barrow  (Jolin),  An  Account  of  Travels  into  the  Interior  of  Southern  Africa 

in  the  years  I7g7-g8,  2  vols.,  London,  1801-04  (121,  164) 
Bartalus  (Stephan),  Die  Zigeuner  und  ihr  Verhaltnis  zu  unserer  Musik  in 

Ungar.  Monatschrift  Budapest,  ii.  Bd.  ist  and  3rd  Heft,  Sept.,  1868,  p. 

60  (63) 
Barth    (Heinrich),   Reisen  und  Entdeckungen  in   Nord  und   Central  Afrika 

1849-55,  5  Bde.,  Gotha,  1857-58  (134) 
Bastian  (Adolf),  Indonesien,  Berlin,  1884  (97,  102,  107,  122,  128) 

Die  Culturlander  des  alten  Amerika,  2  vols.,  Berlin,  1878  (53) 

Remarks  on  the  Indo-Chinese  Alphabets,  in  jfournal  of  the  Roy.  Asiat. 

Soc.,  new  series,  vol.  iii.  part  i.,  London,  1867  (185) 
Bates  (Henry  Walter),  The  Naturalist  on  the  River  Amazon,  2  vols.,  London, 

1863  (55,  56,  loi,  122) 
Baumann  (Oskar),  Usambara,  Berlin,  1891  (71,  113,  127) 
Beckler  (Hermann  D.),  Corrobberri,  in  Globus,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  82,  122  (37,  8g, 

2og) 
Beecham  (John),  Ashantee  and  the  Gold  Coast,  London,  1841  (12,  g2,  100, 

114,  122,  133) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  299 

Beechey  (Fred.  Will.),  Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  and  Behring 

Straits,  2  vols.,  London,  1831  (35,  191) 
Beeckman  (Daniel),  Voyage  to  and  from  the   Island  of  Borneo,  in  P'nikcrt. 

Collect.,  vol.  xi.  (105) 
Behr  (H.  F.  von),  Kriegsbilder  aus  dem  Araberaufstand  in  Deutsch-Ostafrika, 

Leipzig,  1891  (11) 
Belugon    (L.),   Una   nouvelle   Laura    Bridgman,  in  Rcviic  Philosoph.,  18S9, 

torn.  28  p.  175,  transl.  from  57th  An.  Rep.  of  the  Perkins  Inst,   and 

Massachusetts  School  for  the  Blind,  Sept.,  1888  (259) 
Berg  (H.,  Pseudonym  ?),  Die  Lust  an  der  Musik,  Berlin,  1879  (76,  244) 
Berlioz  (Hector),  A  travers  chants,  Paris,  1862  (17) 
Bernau  (Rev.  John  Henry),  Missionary  Labours  in  British  Guiana,  London, 

1847  (94,  105,  129) 
Berthelot   (Sabin),  Memoire  sur  les  Guanches,  from  part    i.  vol.  i.  of  lies 

Canaries,  in  Memoircs  dc  la  Ethnolog.,  Paris,  1841,  tom.  i.  p.  202  (190) 
Bickmore  (Albert  S.),  Travels  in  the  East  Indian  Archipelago,  London,  1868 

(100,  105,  135,  192) 
Billert,  Japanische  Musik,  in  Reissiii.  Mend.  Lexicon,  5th  vol.  (16,  18) 
Bird  (William   Hamilton),  The  Oriental   Miscellany:  being  a  Collection  of 

the  most  Favourite  Airs  of  Hindostan,  Calcutta,  1789  (19) 
Birdwood  (Sir  George  Christopher  M.),  The  Industrial  Arts  of  India,  2  vols., 

1880,  South  Kensington  Mus.  Art  Handbook,  London,  1884  (18,  19) 
Boas  (Franz),  Chinook  Songs,  in  Joitrn.  Amer.  Folklore,  vol.  i.,  1SS8,  p.  220 

(72,  172) 

On  Certain  Songs  and  Dances  of  the  Kwakiutl  of  British  Columbia,  in 

yourn.  of  Amer.  Folklore,  vol.  i.,  1888,  p.  49  (159,  276) 
Bock  (Carl),  The  Head-Hunters  of  Borneo,  London,  1881  (128,  134,  192,  202, 

207) 
Bonvvick  (James),  Daily  Life  and  Origin  of  the  Tasmanians,  London,  1870 

(40,  41,  76,  146,  201,  204,  212,  218,  224) 
Bosman  (William),  A  New  and  Accurate  Description  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea, 

Pinkerf.  Collect.,  xvi.  (100,  124) 
Bouche  (Pierre),  Sept  ans  en  Afrique  occidentale,  Paris,  1S85  (12,  105,  106, 

125) 
Bowdich   (Thomas  Edw.),  Mission   from    Cape    Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee, 

London,  1819  (92) 

An   Essay   on  the  Ancient   Egyptians,  Abyssinians,   and    Ashantees, 

Paris,  1821  (141) 
Bowring  (Sir  John),  The  Kingdom  and   People  of  Siam,  2  vols.,  London, 

1857  (20,  70.  i37>  142) 
Boyle  (Frederick),  Adventures  among  the  Dyaks  of  Borneo,  London,  1865 

(26,  218) 
Brasseur    de    Bourbourg,   Gramatica  de   la   Lengua   Quiche,  in    Collect,  des 

doctiments  inedits,  vol.  ii.,  Paris,  1862  (49,  227) 
Breitenstein  (Heinrich),  Aus  Borneo,  in  Mittheilg.  der  geogr.  Gesell.  in  Wieii, 

xxviii.,  1885,  pp.  193,  247  (25) 


300  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Brett  (William   Henry),  The  Indian  Tribes  of  Guiana,  London,  1868  (213, 

220) 
Bridges  (Thomas),  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Firelanders,  in  A  Voice  of 

Soiifit  America,  vol.  xiii.,  1866  (58) 
Brooks  (W.  R.),  The  Law  of  Heredity,  Baltimore,  1883  (263) 
Brown  (Mary  Eugenia  and  Adams  William),  Musical  Instruments  and  their 

Homes,  New  York,  1888  (13,  16,  iS,  ig,  20,  22,  87,  94,  120,  252) 
Browne  (James),   Die  Eingebornen  Australiens,  in  Pctermann's  Mittlieilg., 

1856,  p.  443  (222) 
Brtie,  A  Description  of  the  River  Sanaga,  in  Astlcy  Collect.,  ii.  (13,  89,  125) 
Brugsch  (Heinrich),  Reiseberichte  aus  ^gypten,  Leipzig,  1855  (198) 
Buchanan,  afterwards  Hamilton   (Francis),  An  Account  of  the  Kingdom  of 

Nepal,  Edinburgh,  1819  (19) 
Buchner  (Max.),  Kunst  und  Witz  der   Neger,  in  Das  Aiisland,  1884,  p.  13 

(221) 

Kamerun,  Leipzig,  1887  (88,  112,  113,  176,  228) 

Reise  durch  den  stillen  Ocean,  Breslau,  187S  (72,  113,  202,  204) 

Bulletins  de  la  Societe  d'Anthropologie,  Paris 

Bulletin  de  la  Societe  de  Geographic,  Paris 

Burchell  (W.  T.),  Travels  in  the  Interior  of  Southern  Africa,  2  vols.,  London, 

1822-24  (i,  2,  3,  94,  104,  no,  119,  139,  163) 
Burckhardt  (John  Lewis),  Notes  on  Bedouins  and  Wahabys,  edited  by  Sir 

W.  Ouseley,  London,  1830  (13,  129,  176) 
Burney  (Charles),  A  General  History  of  Music,  4  vols.,  London,  1776-89  (249) 
Burton  (Richard  Francis),  First  Footsteps  in  East  Africa,  London,  1856  (33) 

Notes  on  the  Dahoman,  in  Menwirs  Anthrop.  Sac.  of  London,  1863-64, 

vol.  i.  p.  313  (185) 

A  Mission  to  Gelele,  2  vols.,  London.  1864  (12,  133) 

Explorations  of  the  Highlands  of  the  Brazil,  London,  1869  (56) 

The  Lake  Region  of  Central  Africa,  2  vols.,  London,  i860  (11,   100, 

106,  146) 
Busch  (Moritz),  Wanderungen  zwischen   Hudson  und  Mississippi,  1851-52, 

2  vols.,  Stuttgart,  1854  (61,  73) 
Byam  (George),  Wild  Life  in  the  Interior  of  Central  America,  London,  1849 

(239) 

Cacilia,  Zeitschrifi  fiir  die  musikalische  Welt,  Mainz 

Caillie  (Rene),  Journal  d"  un  Voyage  a  Timboctou,  3  tom.,  Paris,  1880  (68, 

124,  133,  204) 
Cameron  (Verney  Lovett),  Across  Africa,  London,  1885  (117,  133,  197  211) 
Campbell  (Archibald),  A  Voyage  round  the  World,  Edinburgh,  1816  (207) 
Carli,  vide  Angelo 
Catlin  (George),  Letters  and  Notes  on  the  North  American   Indians,  2  vols., 

London,  1841  (45,  93,  103,  160,  175) 
Century  (The),  New  York  and  London 
Challenger  Expedition,  see  Murray  (John) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  3OI 

Chamberlain  (A.   F.),  Notes  on  the  Mississagua  Indians,  in  Journ.  Amcr. 

Folklore,  vol.  i.,  1888,  p.  150  (103,  194) 
Chamisso  (L.  Carl  Adalbert),  Bemerkungen  und  Ansichten  v.  d.  Naturforscher 

der  Exped.,  in  Kotzebite  Entdcckungen,  Bd.  iii.  (73,  74,  loi,  192,  194, 

198,  213,  224) 
China  Review  (The),  Hong  Kong 
Chinese  Repository  (The),  Canton 

Choris  (M.  Louis),  Voyage  pittoresque  autour  du  Monde,  Paris,  1822  (226) 
Chorley  (H.  F.),  The  National  Music  of  the  World,  edited  by  Hewlett,  Lon- 
don, 1880  (156) 
Christianowitsch  (Alexandre),  Esquisse  historique  de  Musique  Arabe,  Cologne, 

1863  (154,  261) 
Christy  (Edwin  Pearce),  Plantation  Melodies,  part  v..  New  York,  1851-56  (61) 
Christy  (Henry),  Lartet  (E.),  Reliquiae  Aquitanics,  London,  1868  (81) 
Chrysander    (Friedrich),    tjber    die    altindische    Opfermusik,    in    Vicrtclj.  f. 

Mtisikw.,  vol.  i.,  1885,  p.  5  (19,  152) 
Clavigero  (Francisco  Saverio),  The  History  of  Mexico,  2nd  ed.,  2  vols.,  London, 

1807  (138,  195) 
Clark  (Xenos),  Animal  Music,  its  Nature  and  Origin,  in  The  Amcr.  Naturalist, 

vol.  xiii.,  April,  1879,  No.  iv.  p.  209  (247) 
Clement  (Felix),  Histoire  de  la  Musique,  Paris,  18S5  (20,  22,  132) 
Columbus  [Colon]   (Christoph),    Bericht  an   den   Konig  Ferdinand   und   die 

Konigin   Isabelle  iiber  Amerika,  3rd  Reise,  from  Span.,  in  yoiini.f. 

L.  und  Secrciscn,  Bd.  Ixiv.  p.  97  (166) 
Commetant  (Jean  Pierre  Oscar),  La  Musique,  les  Musiciens  et  les  Instruments 

de  Musique  chez  les  difterents  peuples  du  monde,  Paris,  1869  (14,  19, 

52,  53>  57.  63) 
Continental  Monthly  (The),  edited  by  C.  G.   Leland,  Boston  and  New  York 
Cook  (James),  An  Account  of  a  Voyage  round  the  World  in  the  Years  1768, 

1770,  1771,  first  voyage,  3  vols.,  1773  (89,  92,  114,  115,  204) 

A  Voyage  towards  the  South  Pole  and  round  the  World,  2  vols.,  second 

voyage,  London,  1777  (46,  72,  93,  94,  97,  102,  207) 

A  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  vols.  i.   and  ii.  by  Cook,  vol.   iii.  by 

King,  third  voyage,  3  vols.,  London,  1784  (172,  191) 
Cornhill  Magazine  (The),  London 
Corry  (Joseph),  Observations  upon  the  Windward  Coast  of  Africa,  London, 

1807  (94,  118,  122,  188,  200) 
Cranz  (David),  The  History  of  Greenland,   2  vols.,  London,  1820,  (60,  log, 

166) 
Crawfurd  (John),  History  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  3  vols.,  Edinburgh,  1820 

(24,  25,  86,  129,  155,  260) 

A  Sketch  of  the  Geography  of  Borneo,  Jottrn.  Royal  Gcogr.  Soc,  vol. 

xxiii.  p.  69  (25) 
Crotti  (Prime),  Musiconomia,  o  leggi  fondamentali  della  scienza  musicale 

spiegate,  Parma,  1890  (236) 
Curr  (Edward  M.),  The  Australian  Race,  London,  1887  (77,  223) 


302  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Dallas  (Robert  Charles),  The  History  of  the  Maroons,  London,  1803  (10) 
Daniel  (Francisco  Salvador),  Essai  sur  I'origine  et  la  transformation  de  quel- 
ques  instruments,  in  Revue  Africaiuc,  torn.  vii.  p.  266  (136) 

Fantaisie  sur  une  flute  double,  in  Revue  Africaine,  tom.  x.   pp.   382, 

424 (96) 

La  Musique  Arabe.     (Printed  separately  and  in  Revue  Afr.,  tom.  vi., 

vii.,  1S62-63.)     Alger,  1879  (154) 
Darwin  (Charles),  Descent  of  Man,  2nd  edit.,  London,  1888  (156,  195,  199, 

242,  244) 
David  (E.),  Lussy  (M.),  Histoire  de  la  notation  musicale,  Paris,  1882  (162) 
Davies  (James  A.),  Appendix  to  G.  Grey's  Polynesian  Mythology,  London, 

1855  (154) 
Davis  (W.  W.  H.),  El  Gringo,  New  York,  1857  (97,  142) 
Davy  (John),  An  Account  of  the  Interior  of  Ceylon,  London,  1821  (21,  135, 

136,  192) 
Day  (Charles  Russell),  The  Music  and  Musical  Instruments  of  Southern  India 

and  the  Decan,  London,  1891  (19,  142,  153) 

Music  and  Musical  Instruments,  in  Mockler-Ferryman's  Up  the  Niger 

(76,  94,  100,  no,  112,  118,  120,  121,  141,  148,  151,  160,  260) 
Day  (Charles  William),  Five  Years'  Residence  in  the  West  Indies,  2  vols., 

London,  1852  (61) 
Deutsche  Rundschau,  Berlin 
Diderot  (Denis),  Le  Neveu  de  Rameau,  vol.  ix.  of  the  Petite  Bibliotheque  de 

Luxe,  Paris,  1883  (255) 
Dieffenbach,  New  Zealand  and  its  Native  Population,  2  vols.,  London,  1841 

(175,  177) 
Dobrizhoffer  (Martinus),  An  Account  of  the  Abipones,  transl.,  London,  1822 

(53,  54,  103,  204) 
Doehne  (Jacob  Ludwig),  Das  Kafferland  und  seine  Bewohner,  Berlin,  1843 

(167, 
Domenech  (Emanuel),  Seven  Years'  Residence  in  the  Great  Deserts  of  North 

America,  2  vols.,  London,  i860  (212) 
Donovan  (J.),  Music  and  Action,  London,  1889  (208) 

From  Lyre  to  Muse,  London,  iSgo  (236) 

Dorsey  (J.  Owen),  Ponka  and  Omaha  Songs,  in  Journ.  of  Aiuer.  Folklore, 

vol.  ii.,  iSSg,  No.  iv.  p.  271  (72) 
Doyle  (Dr.),  Sketches  in  Australia,  in  Illustrated  London  Ncivs,  3rd  October, 

1863,  p.  353  (221) 
Drury  (Robert),  Madagascar;  or.  Journal  during  Fifteen  Years'  Captivity, 

London,  1729  (102) 
Du  Chaillu  (Paul  B.),  A  Journey  to  Ashangoland,  London,  1S67  (108,  273) 

Explorations  and  Adventures  in  Equatorial  Africa,  London,  1861  (106, 

117,  166,  271,  274) 
Dumont  (d'Urville),  Histoire  Generale  des  Voyages,  4  vols.,  Paris,  1S59  (93, 

125) 
Dwight's  Journal  of  Music,  8th  November,  1862  (61) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  303 

EcKERT  (Franz),  Japanische  Leder,  in  Mitthcilg.  dcr  Gesellsclif.f.  Ostasicn, 
20th  Heft,  June,  1880,  pp.  422-428,  and  23rd  Heft,  March,  1881,  p. 
131(72) 

Edwards  (Amelia  Blandford),  A  Thousand  Miles  up  the  Nile,  2nd  edition, 
London,  1889  (199) 

Edwards  (Charles  L.),  Folklore  of  the  Bahama  Negroes,  in  Aiiwr.  yonru.  of 
Psychol.,  vol.  ii.,  No.  iv.  (62,  147,  196) 

EUis  (Alexander  J.),  On  the  Musical  Scales  of  Various  Nations,  in  Journal 
of  the  Soc.  of  Arts,  vol.  xxxiii.,  27th  March,  1885,  pp.  485,  1102  (152, 
153,  155) 

On  the  History  of  Musical  Pitch,  in  yoiirnal  of  the  Soc.  of  Arts,  Lon- 
don, 5th  March  and  2nd  April,  1880,  pp.  293-336,  vol.  xxviii.  (78) 

Ellis  (William),  Narrative  of  a  Tour  through  Hawaii,  London,  1S26  (75) 

History  of  Madagascar,  London,  1858  (14,  6g,  71,  114,  122) 

Polynesian  Researches,  2  vols.,  London,  1829  (95,  102,  iii,  180) 

Elson  (Louis  C),  Curiosities  of  Music,  Boston,  1880  (10,  loS,  119,  136,  224) 
Emerson  (James),  afterwards  Tennent  (Sir  J.  Em.),  Ceylon,  an  Account  of 

the  Island,  5th  edition,  2  vols.,  London,  i860  (21,  74,  100,  116,  237) 
Engel  (Carl),  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Nat.   Music,   London,   1866 
(161,  162,  178) 

Musical  Myths  and  Facts,  2  vols.,  London,  1S76  (168,  169,  260,  262) 

The  Music  of  the  most  Ancient  Nations,  London,  1864(62,  85,  152,  160) 

— —  Researches  into  the  Early  History  of  the  Violin  Family,  London,  1883 

(130) 

Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the   Musical  Instruments  in  the  South  Ken- 

sington Museum,  London,  1874  (81) 

English  Cyclopaedia,  conducted  by  Charles  Knight 

Erman  (Georg  Adolph.),  Reise  um  die  Erde,  1828-30,  Berlin,  1S35-41  (77, 
123,  219) 

Erskine  (Capt.  John),  Journal  of  a  Cruise  among  the  Islands  of  the  Western 
Pacific,  London,  1853  (30,  88) 

Etzel  (Anton  von),  Gronland,  in  Wicdenmanii,  Haiiff,  Reiseii,  Lief  44,  Stutt- 
gart, i860  (60) 

Evans  (George  William),  A  Description  of  Van  Dieman's  Land,  London, 
1822(41) 

Eyre  (Edw.  John),  Journals  of  Expeditions  of  Discovery  into  Central  Aus- 
tralia in  1840-1,  2  vols.,  London,  1S45  (39,  88,  109,  136,  175,  igi,  211) 

Faber  (Ernst),  The  Chinese  Theory  of  Music,  in  China  Review,  vols.  i.  and 

ii.,  and  Notes  and  Queries  on  China,  vol.  iv.  (16) 
Falkenstein  (J.),  see  Guessfeldt 

Falkner  (Thomas),  A  Description  of  Patagonia,  Hereford,  1774(54,  169) 
Fetis  (Fran9ois  Joseph),  A.  Stradivari,  Paris,  1856  (129) 

Sur  un  nouveau   mode    de   classification  des  races  humaines  d'apres 

leurs  systemes  musicaux,  in  Bulletins  de   la  Soc.  d'Antlirop.,   t.   ii., 
Serie  ii.,  Paris,  1867,  p.  134  (64,  65) 


304  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Fetis  (Francois  Joseph),  Histoire  generale  de  la  Musique,  5  vols.,  Paris, 1869-76 

(17.81,82) 
Fewkes  (J.  Walter),  A  Few  Summer  Ceremonials  at  Zutii  Pueblo,  in  Joiirn. 

Aincr.  Efliii.,  vol.  i.  (125,  126,  161,  194) 

A  Contribution  to  Passamaquoddy  Folklore,  in  Journ.  Amcr.  Folklore, 

vol.  iii.,  1890,  No.  xi.  p.  257  (172) 
Field  (Barron),  Geographical  Memoirs  on  New  South  Wales,  London,  1825 

(41) 
Finsch  (Otto),  Ethnologische  Erfahrungen  aus  der  Sudsee,  in  Natitr.  Hist. 

Hof.  Museum.,  Vienna,  Bd.  iii.  (74,  120,  126) 

Reise  nach  West  Sibirien  im  Jahre  1876,  Berlin,  1879  (22) 

Flegel  (Edward  Robert),  Lose  Blatter  aus  dem  Tagebuche  meiner  Haussa- 

Freunde,  Hamburg,  18S5  (102) 
Fleischer  (Oskar),  Land,  Recherches  sur  I'histoir  gamme  arabe,  in  Viertclj. 

Aliisikw,  vol.  ii.,  1886,  p.  497  (154) 
Fleischer  (Alice  C),  Leaves  from  my  Omaha   Note-book,  in  yotirii.  Amcr. 

Folklore,  vol.  ii.,  i88g.  No.  vi.  p.  225  (72) 
Folklore  Journal,  vol.  v.,  London 
Folklore  Society  Publications,  1878-1885,  The  former  Publications  published 

under  the  title,  The  Folklore  Record,  London 
Forbes  (Henry  O.),  A  Naturalist's  Wanderings  in  the   Eastern  Archipelago, 

London, 1885  (73) 
Forel  (Auguste),  Les  Fourmis  de  la  Suisse,  Zurich,  1874  (237) 
Forrest  (Thomas),  A  Voyage  to  New  Guinea  and  the  Moluccas,  London, 

1779  (28,  206) 
Forster  (Johann  Georg  Adam),  A  Voyage  round  the  World,  1772-75,  2  vols., 

London,  1777  (141,  148) 
Forsyth  (Capt.  James),  The  Highlands  of  Central  India,  2nd  edition,  London, 

1 87 1  (96) 
Fortier  (Alcee),  Customs  and  Superstitions  in  Louisiana,  in  jfniirii.  of  Amcr. 

Folklore,  vol.  i.,  1888,  No.  ii.  p.  136  (126) 
Foster  (Henry),  Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the  South  Atlantic  Ocean,  1828- 

30,  2  vols.,  from  the  private  Journ.  of  W.  H.  B.   Webster,  London, 

1834  (77,  88.  185,  188) 
Franklin  (Sir  John),  Narrative  of  a  Journey  to  the  Polar  Sea,  London,   1823 

(196) 
Freycinet  (Louis  de),  Voyage  autour  du  monde,  9  vols.,  Paris,  1824-44  (37. 

192) 
Fritsch  (Gustav),  Drei  Jahre  in  Sud-Afrika,  Breslau,  1868  (go) 

Die  Eingeborenen  Siid-Afrika's,  Leipzig,  1872  (86,  90,  no,  119,  197) 

Frcebel  (Julius),  Aus  Amerika,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1857-58  (117) 

Galaup  de  la  Perouse  (Jean  Fran9ois),  A  Voyage  round  the  World  in  the 
Years  1785-1788,  transl.,  2nd  edition,  3  vols.,  London,  1799  (46,  142) 

Galton  (Francis),  A  Theory  of  Heredity,  in  Jonrn.  Aiithrop.  Inst.,  vol.  v. 
PP-  343-345  (264) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  305 

Gallon  (Francis),  Natural  Inheritance,  London,  i88g  (264) 

Inquiries  into  Human  Faculty  and  its  Development,  London,  1883  (238, 

240) 

Hereditary  Genius,  London,  1869  (265) 

Narrative  of  an  Explorer  in  Tropical  South  Africa,  London,  i88g  (5,  6, 

124) 
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  El  Inca,  Hakluyt  Society,  2  vols.,  London,  1869-71  (51) 
Gardiner  (Allen  Francis),    Narrative   of  a   Journey  to   the   Zoolu   Country, 

London,  1836  (71,  178) 
Gardiner  (William),  The  Music  of  Nature,  London,  1832  (107) 
Garner  (R.  L.),  The  Simian  Tongue,  in  New  Review,  June,  1891,  p.  555  (240) 
Georgi    (Johann    Gottlieb),    Beschreibung   aller    Nationen    des    Russischen 

Reichs,  St.  Petersburg,  1776  (23,  193,  203,  212) 
.  Gerland  (Georg),   tJber  das  Aussterben  der   Naturvolker,  see   also    Waitz, 

Leipzig,  1868  (44) 
Gill  (William  (Wyatt),  Myths  and  Songs  from  the  South   Pacific,  London, 

1876  (193) 
Gilman  (Benjamin  Ives),  Zuni  Melodies,  in  Jomni.  Aiiier.  Eflni.,  vol.  i.  (150, 

15S) 

On  some   Psychological   Aspects  of  the  Chinese  Musical  System,  in 

Phiiosoph.  Review,  vol.  i.  i,  2  (155) 
Globus,  edited  by  Karl  Andree,  Braunschweig 

Goertz  (Carl  von),  Reise  urn  die  Welt,  1844-47,  Stuttgart,  1S35  (77,  226) 
Gould  (John),  Handbook  to  the  Birds  of  Australia,  2  vols.,   London,   1865 

(249) 
Graah  (W.  A.),  Narrative  of  an  Expedition  to  Greenland,  London,  1837  (75) 
Graber  (Vitus),  Die  chordotonalen  Sinnesorgane  und  das  Gehdr  der  Insecten, 

in  Archiv  Mikroscop.  Anatoiiiie,  Bd.  xx.,  1882,  p.  506  (238,  239) 
Graham   (W.    W.),  Climbing  the   Himalayas,  in  From   the  Equator  to  the 

Pole,  London,  1887  (22) 
Grant  (Colquhoun),  Description  of  Vancouver  Island,  in  jfonrii.  Loud.  Gcogr. 

Soc.,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  268  (172) 
Grant  (James  Augustus),  Speke  (John  Hanning),  Lake  Victoria,  compiled  by 

G.  C.  Swayne,  London,  i868  (132) 
Grant  (James  Augustus),  A  Walk  across  Africa,  London,  1864  (9,   11,  68, 

94,  99,  113,  115,  116,  121,  132,  152,  189) 
Greenwood  (J.),  Curiosity  of  Savage  Life,  London,  1863  (179) 
Grey  (George),  Journals  of  Two  Expeditions  of  Discovery  in  N.  W.  and  W. 

Australia,  2  vols.,  London,  1841  (68,  74,  109,  164,  165,  175,  177,  206) 

Polynesian  Mythology,  London,  1855  (42,  43,  154) 

Grosse  (Ernst),  Ethnologic  und  yEsthetik,  in   Viertelj.ftir  wissciisch.  Phil. 

(1891),  XV.  4  (253) 

Herbert  Spencer's  Lehre  von  dem  Unerkennbaren,  Leipzig,  1890  (267) 

Grout  (Lewis),  Zululand,  Philadelphia,  1864  (176) 

Grove  (Sir  George),  A  Dictionary  of  Music  and  Musicians,  4  vols.,  London, 
1879-89 

20 


306  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Guessfeldt  (Paul),  Falkenstein  (Julius),  Pechuel-LcEsche  (Emil),  Die  Loango 

Expedition,  Leipzig,  1879  (114,  182,  183,  239,  241) 
Gurney  (Edmund),  Power  of  Sound,  London,  i88o  (255,  259) 
Guyau  (Jean  Marie),  Les  Problemes  de  I'Esthetique  contemporaine,   Paris, 

1884  (234,  235,  236,  237) 

Education  and  Heredity,  transl.,  London,  1891  (269) 

Haafner  (J.),  Reise  langs  der  Kiiste  Orixa  und  Koromandel  in  Indien,  1784 

(from  the  Dutch),  in  Joiirii.  of  L.  und  S.,  Bd.  vii.  pp.  117,  147  (203) 
Haddon    (Alfred   C),    The   Ethnography  of  the   Western   Tribe   of   Torres 

Straits,  in  Joiirn.  Aiithr.  lust.,  vol.  xix.  No.  iii.,  1890,  p.  297  (104,  114) 
Hjeckel  (Ernst  Heinrich),  Indische  Reisebriefe,  2nd  Aufl.,  Berlin,  1884  (22) 
— — •  Generelle  Morphologie  der  Organismen,  2  Bd.,  Berlin,  1866  (24S) 
Hahn  (Theophilus),  Die  Nama-Hottentoten,  in  Globus,  xii.  p.  278  (141,  178) 
Hall  (Basil),  Account  of  a  Voyage  to  Corea  and  the  Great  Loo-Choo  Islands, 

London,  1818  (58) 
Hall  (C.  F.),  Arctic  Researches  among  Esquimaux,  New  York,  1865  (58) 
Hamilton    (Alexander),   A    New  Account  of  the  East   Indies,  in   Piukerton 

Collect.,  vol.  viii.  (93,  107) 
Hamilton  (F.),  sec  Buchanan 

Harkness  (H.),  A  Description  of  the  Neilgherry  Hills,  London,  1832  (19) 
Hart  (George),  The  Violin  and  its  Music,  London,  1884  (130) 
Hauser  (Michael),  Aus  dem  Wanderbuche  eines  bsterreichischen  Virtuosen, 

edited  by  S.  Hauser,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1859  (35) 
Hein  (Alois  Raimund),  Malerei  und  Technische  Kiinste  der  Dayaks,  xnAnal. 

K.  K.  Nnturh.  Hofmuscuiu,  Vienna,  Bd.  iv.  (282) 

Die  bildenden  Kiinste  bei  den  Dayaks  auf  Borneo,  Wien,  i8go  (25,  93, 

no.  III,  128,  168,  207) 
Helmholtz  (Hermann  L.  v.).  On  the  Sensation  of  Tone,  2nd  edition,  transl. 

by  A.  Ellis  (German  edition,  4th  Aufl.,  1877),  London,  1885  (143,  150, 

153) 
Herrara  (Antonio  de),  The  Voyage  of  Francisco  de  Orellana,  a.d.  1540-41,  in 

Markham's  Exped.  into  the  Valley  of  the  Amazons  (239) 
Heuglin    (Theodor  von),    Reise   in   das   Gebiet    des    vveissen    Nil,    Leipzig, 

Heidelberg,  1869  (118,  125,  205) 

Die  Tinne  sche  Expedition  im  Westlichen  Nil-Quellgebiete,  in  Ergdn- 

zungsheft  15  zn  Peterm.  Mitth.  Ergdnzungsband,  iii.,  1863-64  (15) 
Hinrichs   (Johann    Christian),    Entstehung    der    russischen    Jagdmusik,    St. 

Petersburg,  1796  (96) 
Hipkins  (A.  J.),  Cantor  Lectures  on   Musical  Instruments.      Reprinted  from 

the  Jouru.  of  the  Soc.  of  Arts,  31st  July,  7th  and  14th  August,  London, 

1891  (,I2l) 

Musical  Instruments,  Historic,  Rare  and  Unique,  Edinburgh,  1888  (16, 

18,  20) 
Hirth  (Georg),  Aufgaben  der   Kunstphysiologie,  2  vols.,  Miinchen,  Leipzig, 
1891  (265,  281) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  307 

Holtz  (von),  Zwei  japanische  Lieder,  in  Mittlieilg.  d.  dciitscJt.  Gcs.f.  Natiir. 

and  Volkerk.  Ostasiciis,  3rd  Heft,  September,  1873  (72) 
Holub  (Emil),  Seven  Years  in   South  Africa,  1872-79,  2  vols.,  London,  1881 

(132) 
Home  (Henry,    Lord   Kames),   Elements  of  Criticism,  8th  edition,   2  vols., 

Edinburgh,  1807  (232) 
Houtou  de  la  Billardiere  (Jaques  Julien),  An  Account  of  a  Voyage  in  Search 

of  La  Perouse,  1791-93,  transl.,  2  vols.,  London,  1800  (31,  32) 
Howitt  (A.  W.),  Songs  and  Songmakers  of  some  Australian  Tribes,  in /1»^/;;'. 

jfoiirii.,  vol.  xvi.  p.  327  (38,  39,  68,  146,  217) 
Humboldt   (F.   H.   Alexander  von),   Bonpland   (Aime),   Reise  in  die  ^Equa- 

torialgegenden  des  neuen   Continents,  1799-1804,  6  parts,   Stuttgart, 

1815-32  (90,  91,  210) 
Hunter  (John),  An  Historical  Journal  of  the  Transactions  at  Port  Jackson 

and  Norfolk  Islands,  London,  1793  (168) 
Hupfeld,  Das  zwiefache  Grundgesetz  d.  Rhythmus  und  Accent,  in  Zcitschr. 

d.  deutsch.  movgl.  Gcscll.,  vi.  p.  170  (235) 

Illustrated  London  News,  London 

Im  Thurn  (Everard  F.),  Among  the  Indians  of  Guiana,   London,   1883  (83, 

86,  96,  loi,  124,  ig6,  220) 
International  Oriental  Congress,  Actes  du  sixieme  Congres  International  des 

Orientalistes  tenu  en  1883  a  Leide,  Leide,  1884 
Irwin  (Eyles),  Chinese  Musick,  examples,  in  Oriental  Collect.,  i.  p.  343 

Chinese  Tunes,  examples,  in  Oriental  Collect.,  ii.  p.  148 

Ives  (Joseph  C),  Report  upon  the  Colorado  River,  in  36^/;  Cong,  ist  Sess. 
House  Ex.  Doc.  90,  Washington,  1S61  (97) 

Jackson  (James  Grey),  An  Account  of  Timbuctoo  and  Housa  (from  oral 
communications  by  El  Hage  Abd.  Salam  Shabeeny),  London,  1820 
(200) 

Jagor  (F.),  Andamanesen  oder  Mincopies,  in  Zcitschr.  f.  Etliii.,  1877,  vol.  ix. 
(24,  75,  87) 

Travels  in  the  Philippines,  transl.,  London,  1875  (57) 

James  (William),  The  Principles  of  Psychology,   2  vols..   New  York,   1890 

(267) 
Jewitt  (John  R.),  A  Narrative  of  J.  R.  J.  during  a  Captivity  of  nearly  Three 

Years  among  the  Savages  of  Nootka  Sound,  Wakefield,  1816  (83,  88, 

93.  103,  172) 
Johnston  (H.  H.),  The  River  Congo,  from  its  Mouth  to  Bolobo,  London,  1S84 

(loi,  117,  125) 
Joinville,  On  the  Religion  and  Manners  of  the  People  of  Ceylon,  in  Asiatick 

Researches,  vol.  vii.,  iSoi,  pp.  399,  438  (20,  21,  152) 
Jones  (Edward),  Lyric  Airs,  London,  1804  (41) 
Jones  (William),  On  the  Musical  Modes  of  the  Hindus,  also  6th  vol.  of  his 

Select  Works,  London,  1784  (18) 


308  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Joseph   Charles  Louis    (Archduke   of  Austria),   Czigany   nyelvtan   romano 

csibakero  Sziklaribe,  in  Magyar  Tudomanyos  Akadcmia,  1888  (63) 
Journal  fur  die  neuesten  Land  und  Seereisen,  Berlin,  1808-36 
Journal  of  American  Ethnology  and  Archaeology,  edited  by  J.  Walter  Fewkes, 

Boston,  New  York 
Journal  of  American  Folklore  (The),  Boston 

Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  Boston,  New  York  and  London 
Journal  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of  London,  London 
Journal  of  the  Gipsy  Lore  Society,  Edinburgh 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  London 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  London 
Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  Singapore 
Journal  of  the  Ceylon  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Colombo 
Journal  of  the  Society  of  Arts,  London 
Jukes  (Joseph  Beete),  Narrative  of  the  Surveying  Voyage  of  H. M.S.  Fly,  2 

vols.,  London,  1847  (i^Oi  '^SSi  204) 
Jullien  (Adolphe),  La  Musique  et  la  Philosophic  du  xviii.  me  siecle,  Paris, 

1873  (251) 

Kaines  (Joseph),  On  some  of  the   Racial  Aspects  of  Music,  in   Aiitlirop. 

jfoiirii.,  vol.  i.,  1872,  p.  xxviii.  (149) 
Keating  (W.  H.),  Narrative  of  an  Expedition  to  the  Source  of  St.  Peter's 

River,  2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1824  (172,  220) 
Kennan  (George),  Tent  Life  in  Siberia,  London,  1873  (122,  180) 
Keppel  (Hon.  Henry),  Expedition  to  Borneo,  3rd  edition,  2  vols.,  London, 

1847  (192) 
Kerst  (S.  Gottfried),  tjber  brazilianische  Zustande  der  Gegenwart,  in  Joitni. 

f.  L.  11.  S.,  Ixxi.  pp.  303-4  (133) 
Kiesewetter  (Rafael  Georg),  Die  Musik  der  Araber,  Pref.  by  Hammer-Purg- 

stall,  Leipzig,  1842  (183) 
King  (P.  Parker),  and  Fitz-Roy  (R.),  Narrative  of  the  Surveying  Voyages  of 

the  Adventure  and  Beagle,  3  vols.,  London,  1839  (35) 
Kcenig  (Arthur),  Beitrage  zur  Psych,  und  Phys.  der  Sinnesorgane.     Helm- 

holtz  als  Festgruss,  Hamburg,  Leipzig,  i8gi 
Kohl  (Johann  Georg),  Kitschi-Gami  oder  Erzahlungen  vom  Obern   See,  2 

vols.,  Bremen,  1859  (160) 
Kolbe  (Peter),  Caput  Bonae  Spei  Hodiernum,  Nurnberg,  1719  (138) 
Kosegarten  (J.  G.  L.),  Die  moslemischen  Schriftsteller  iiber  die  Theorie  der 

Musik, -in  Zeitschr.f.  d.  Kunde  d.  Morgcnl.,  Bd.  v.  p.  137  (154) 
Kotzebue  (O.  von),  A  Voyage  of  Discovery  into  the  South  Sea  and  Behring 

Straits,  3  vols.,  London,  1821  (36) 
Krapf  (Johann  Ludwig),  Travels  during  an  Eighteen  Years'  Residence  in 

Eastern    Africa    (German    edition,    Stuttgart,    1858),    London,    i860 

(167) 
Kraus    (Alexandre),    Ethnographie   Musicale,  La  Musique    au   Japon,    2nd 

edition,  Florence,  1879  (17) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  3O9 

Krebs  (C.   A.),  Kurzer   Bericht  liber  die  Kurilischen  Inseln  (geheime  See 

Exped.  de  Capitain  Billings),  in  Joiirn.  f.  L.  mid  S.,  Bd.  xvii.  p.  355 

(219) 
Krusenstern  (Adam  Johann  von),  Reise  um  die  Welt  in  den  Jahren,  1803- 

1806,  Bd.  iii.,  St.  Petersburg,  1810-11  (36,  105,  202) 
Kueffner  (Joseph),  Siebold  (Ph.  von),  Japanische  Weisen  gesammelt  von  Ph. 

Fr.  von  S.,  Leiden,  1836  (17) 

Labillardiere,  sec  Houtou 

Laing  (Alexander  Gordon),  Travels  in  Western  Africa,  London,  1825   (67, 

198) 
Land  (J.  P.  N.),  Recherches  zur  I'histoire  de  la  gamme  Arabe,  in  Actcs  du 

Qcni  Coiigr.  Litem,  des  Orient.,  part  ii.  sect.  i.  p.  37,  Leide,  1885  (154) 

Groneman  (J.),  De  Gamelan  te  Jogjakarta,  in  K.  Akad.  van  Wcten- 

schappcn.  Verh.  Afd.  Letterk.,  Deel  19,  Amsterdam,  1890  (24,  25, 142) 
Landa  (Diego  de).  Relation  des  chosesde  Yucatan,  in  Collection  de  documents 

dans  les  laiigucs  indigenes,  vol.  iii.,  Paris,  1864  (138,  213) 
Lander  (Richard),  Records  of  Captain  Clapperton's  Last  Expedition  to  Africa, 

2  vols.,  London,  1830  (71,  89,  178,  179,  182,  187,  189,  190,  197,  217) 
Lander  (Richard  and  John),  Journal  of  an  Expedition  to  Explore  the  Course 

and  Termination  of  the  Niger,  3  vols.,  London,  1832  (197) 
Landois  (Hermann),    Die   Ton    und   Stimmapparate   der  Insecten,   Leipzig, 

1867  (239) 
Lang  (Andrew),  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Religion,  2  vols.,  London,  1887  (125,  198) 

Custom  and  Myth,  2nd  edition,  London,  1885  (125) 

Langsdorf  (Georg  Henrich  v.)  Voyages  and  Travels  in  Various  Parts  of  the 

World,  1803-07,  transl.,  2  vols.,  London,  1813-14  (36,  47,  71,  75,  146, 

154,  171,  179,  202,  210,  212,  2ig) 
La  Perouse,  see  Galaup 
Lartet  (S.),  vide  Christy 
Lassen  (Christian),  Indische  Alterthumskunde,  4  Bde. ,  Bonn,  Leipzig,  1847- 

62  (18,  184) 
Lay  (G.  Tradescant),  The  Chinese  as  They  Are,  London,  1841  (25) 
Leems  (Knud),  An  Account  of  the  Laplanders  of  Finmark,  in  Pink.  Collect., 

vol.  i.  p.  376  (22,  88) 
Le  Mesurier  (C.  J.  R.),  The  Veddas  of  Ceylon,  in  Journ.  of  the  Ceylon  Br. 

of  the  R.  As.  Soc,  vol.  ix.  No.  xxxii.  p.  336,  1887  (70) 
Lempriere  (William),  A  Tour  from  Gibraltar  to  Morocco,  Pinkei-f.  Collect. 

XV.  (13,  129) 
Lenoir  de  Lafage  (Juste  Adrien),  Histoire  Generale  de  la  Musique,  2  vols. 

and  Atlas,  Paris,  1844  (14,  16,  19) 
Lenz  (Oskar),  Skizzen  aus  Westafrika,  Berlin,  1878  (8,  g,  10,  105,  106,  107, 

124,  167,  216) 

Timbuktu,  2  Bde.,  Leipzig,  1884  (67) 

Lesseps  (Ferdinand   Marie  de),  Travels  in  Kamtschatka,  1878-88,  2  vols, 
(from  the  French),  London,  1790  (176,  219) 


3IO  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Lewin  (T.  H.),  Wild  Races  of  South-Eastern  India,  London,  i^iyo  (95,  96, 

97.  225) 
Lewis  (M.  G.),  Journal  of  a  Residence  among  the  Negroes  in  the  West 

Indies,  London,  1845  (168) 
Lichtenstein   (Dr.   Martin    H.    C),    Travels  in   Southern   Africa,   1S03-1806, 

transl.,  2  vols.,  London,  1812-15  (33,  iig,  133,  151) 
Liebich  (Richard),  Die  Zigeuner,  3  Abth.,  Leipzig,  1863  (63,  131) 
Linn^us  (Carl),  Lachesis  Lapponica,  publ.  by  J.  E.  Smith,  2  vols.,  London, 

1811  (88) 
Lisyansky  (Yury  Fedorovich),  A  Voyage  round  the  World,  1803-06,  London, 

1814  (47) 
Liszt  (Ferencz),  Des  Bohemiens  en  Hongrie,  Paris,  1859  (62) 
Livingstone  (David),  Missionary  Travels  and   Researches  in   South   Africa, 

London,  1S57  (6,  114,  115,  118,  143,  189) 
Lloyd  (G.  T.),  Thirty-three  Years  in  Tasmania  and  Victoria,  London,  1S62 

(39) 
Lobo  (Jerome,  Portuguese  Jesuit),  A  Voyage  to  Abyssinia,  from  the  French, 

Pinkert.  Collect.,  vol.  xv.  (13,  75) 
Lockwood   (Rev.   S.),   A  Singing  Hesperomys,  in  Aiiur.  Naturalist,  vol.  v., 

1871,  p.  761  (239) 
Lombroso    (Cesare),    Klinische    Beitrage    zur    Psychiatrie,    Leipzig,    1S69 

(259) 
Long  (C.  Chaille),  Central  Africa,  Naked  Truths  of  Naked  People,  London, 

1876  (99,  log,  189,  205) 
Long  (Stephen  H.),  Account  of  an  Expedition  to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  2 

vols.,  Philadelphia,  1S23  (203,  219) 
Longman's  Magazine 
Low  (James),  History  of  Tennasserim,  in  Jouni.  of  the  Roy.  Asiatic  Soc, 

vol.  iv.,  1837,  p.  47  (22) 
Lubbock  (Sir  John),  Pre-Historic  Times,  5th  edition,  London,  iSgo  (93,  201, 

202,  249) 

The  Origin  of  Civilisation,  5th  edition,  London,  1889  (35,  198) 

Ants,  Bees,  and  Wasps,  Int.  Sc.  Scries,  vol.  xl.,  London,  1882  (237) 

On    the   Senses,   Instincts,  and   Intelligence   of  Animals,  Intern.   Sc. 

Scries,  vol.  Ixv.,  London,  1889  (237) 
Lumholtz  (Carl),  Among  Cannibals,  transl.  from  the  Danish,  London,  1889 

(70,  109,  147,  171,  175,  222) 
Lunn  (Charles),  The  Philosophy  of  Voice,  6th  edition,  London,  1888  (240) 
Lux  (A.  E. ),  Von  Loando  nach  Kimbundu,  Wien,  1880  (201) 
Lyell    (Charles),    The   Geological   Evidence   of  the   Antiquity   of  Man,   4th 

edition,  London,  1873  (81) 
Lyon  (George  Francis),  A  Narrative  of  Travels  in  Northern  Africa,  1818-20, 

London,  1821  (71,  114,  129,  179,  204,  220) 

MacCann   (William),  Two  Thousand   Miles'  Ride   through  the  Argentine 
Provinces,  2  vols.,  London,  1853  (169) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  3II 

Macdonald  (Rev.  J.),  On  Manners  and  Customs  of  South  African  Tribes,  in 

Aiiflir.  jfourn.,  vol.  xx.  p.  142  (167) 
Mach  (Ernst),  Analyse  der  Empfindungen,  Jena,  1886  (253,  266) 
Macmillan's  Magazine 
Magyar  <Laszli),  Reisen  in  Sud- Africa,  transl..  Pest,  Leipzig,  1S59  (94,  116, 

117,  167,  200) 
Malcom  (Howard),  Travels  in  South-Eastern  Asia,  2  vols.,  Boston,  1839  (22, 

33.  137) 
Man  (E.  H.),  The  Aboriginal  Inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  in  Anthr. 

Jourii.,  vol.  xii.  p.  388  (24,  69,  136,  174) 
Mariner  (William  Martin),  An  Account  of  the  Tonga  Islands,  in  Quarterly 

Rcviccv,  vol.  xvii.  No.  xxxiii.  p.  33,  1817  (32,  86) 

An  Account  of  the  Tonga  Islands,  compiled  by  J.  Martin,  2nd  edition, 

2  vols.,  London,  1818  (31,  32) 
Markham   (C.    R.),   Expeditions   into  the  Valley  of  the  Amazons,  Hakhiyt 

Society,  1S59,  see  Herrara 
Marknengo-Cesaresco,  Negro  Songs  from  Barbadoes,  in  The  Folkloreyouru., 

vol.  V.  p.  5,  1887  (62) 
Marryat  (Frank  S.),  Borneo  and  the  Indian  Archipelago,  London,  1848  (26, 

105) 
Marsden  (William),  The  History  of  Sumatra,  London,  1811   (136,  146,  154, 

1S2,  225) 
Martin    (W.   C.   L.),   General  Introduction   to  the  Nat.  Hist  of  Mammalia, 

London,  1841  (156) 
Martins    (Carl    Ph.   von),    Beitrage    zur    Ethnographic    und    Sprachenkunde 

Amerikas,  Leipzig,  1867  (44,  183) 

Spix  (Johann  Baptist),  Travels  in  Brazil,   1817-1820,  2  vols.,   transl., 

London,  1824  (56,  227) 
Mauch  (Carl),  C.  Mauch's  Reisen  in  Siid-Afrika,  1865-1872,  in  Pctermann's 

Mitth.  Ergduziiiigsbd.  8,  Ergdnzungshcft,  No.  xxxvii.,  1874(9,  92,  100, 

108,  116,  189) 
Mayne   (C.   R. ),   Four  Years  in   British  Columbia  and  Vancouver    Island, 

London,  1862  (169) 
Meinicke  (Carl  E.),  Die  Insel  Pitcairn,  Prenzlau,  1S5S  (34) 

Die  Inseln  des  stillen  Oceans,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1875-76  (29,  31,  35,  36, 

41,  87,  191,  201,  209,  213,  218) 

Das  Festland  Australien,  2  th.,  Prenzlau,  1837  (^49) 

Melville  (Hermann),  Narrative  of  a  Four   Months'   Residence  among  the 

Natives  of  the  Marquesas  Islands,  London,  1846  (115) 
Memoires  de  la  Societe  Ethnologique,  Paris 
Merck  (Dr.  Karl  Heinrich),    Nachrichten   von  den    Tschuktschen  (from  a 

MS.),  in  Journal  f.  L.  und  S.,  Bd.  xvii.  (no,  213,  219) 
Merolla  da  Sorrento  (Jerom,  Missioner  in  the  year  1682),  A  Voyage  to  Congo 

(from  the  Ital.),  Pinkert.  Collect.,  xvi.  (99,  107,  117,  118,  121,  143) 
Metz   (Rev.   Franz),   Tribes   Inhabiting  the  Neilgherry   Hills,  2nd  edition, 

Mangalore,  1864  (19,  170) 


312  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Meyer  (A.  B.),  Publicationen  des  K.  Ethnologisch.  Museums  in  Dresden,  9 

vols.,  Leipzig,  i88i-go  (19,  25,  95,  97,  116,  120,  123,  191) 
Michaelis    (C.    F.),    Ueber    die    Musik   einiger  wilden  Volker,    in    Allgem. 

iiiiisikalischcZeitiing, 'Nos.xxx.  xxxi.  pp.509,  525,  Leipzig,  1814  (76,  119) 
Miklukha  Maklay,  Die  Papuas  auf  New  Guinea,  in  Das  Aiislaiid,  1874,  p. 

845  (97,  no,  210) 
Mind,  London 

Mittheilungen  der  Anthropologischen  Gesellschaft,  Wien 
Mittheilungen  der  k.  k.  geographischen  Gesellschaft,  Wien 
Mittheilungen  der  deutschen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Natur-und  Volkerkunde,  Berlin, 

Yokohama 
Mockler-Ferryman  (A.   ¥.),  Up  the  Niger,  with    Appendix  by  C.   R.   Day, 

London, 1892 
Moffat  (Robert),  Missionary  Labours  and  Scenes  in  Southern  Africa,  nth 

thousand,  London,  1846  (ng) 
Mohr  (Edward),  Nach  den  Victoriafallen  des  Zambesi,  2  Bd.,  Leipzig,  1875 

(5,  67) 
Molina   (Giovanni   Ignazio  Abbe    Don),    History   of  Chili,  transl.,   2   vols., 

London,  1809  (169) 
Moloney  (Sir  Alfred),  Notes  on  Yoruba  and  the  Colony  and  Protectorate  of 

Lagos,  in  Proceed.  R.  Geogr.  S.,  new  series,  vol.  xii.,  1890,  p.  596  (112) 
Monts  de.   Nova  Francia,   containing  Canada  and    Louisiana,   in    Oxford 

Collection,  ii.  796  (172) 
Moodie  (John  W.  D.),  Ten  Years  in  South  Africa,  2  vols.,  London,   1835 

(119,  140) 
Morgan  (C.  Lloyd),  Animal  Life  and  Intelligence,  London,  1890-91  (245,  246, 

247.  279) 

Animal  Sketches,  London,  1S91  (241,  242) 

Morgan  (Lewis  H.),  Ancient  Society,  London,  1877  (247) 

League  of  the    Ho-de-no-san-nee,  or    Iroquois,  Rochester,   1851    (52, 

173,  194,  210) 
MUller  (Wilhelm  Christian),  Versuch  einer  ^sthetik  der  Tonkunst,  Leipzig, 

1830  (150) 
MUller  (Dr.),  Einige  Notizen  ueber  die  japanesische  Musik,  in  Mitthcil.  d. 

deutsch.  Ges.f.  Ostasieii,  6  Heft,  6th  Decem.,  1874,  pp.  13-32  (17) 
Muller  (Friedrich),  AUgemeine  Ethnographic,  2  Aufl.,  Wien,  1879  (87) 
Munzinger  (Werner),  Ostafrikanische  S^tudien,  Schaffhausen,  1864  (181) 
Murray  (Boyles),  Pitcairn,  in  Nautical  Magazine,  1834,  p.  543  (34) 
Murray  (Hugh),  Wilson  (L.  John  Marius),  The  African  Continent,  London, 

1853  (67) 
Murray  (John),  Thomson  (Sir  C.  Wyville),  Report  on  the  Scient.  Res.  of  the 

Voyage  of  H.M.S.  Challenger,  under  command  of  G.  S.  Nares  and 

F.  F.  Thomson,  2  vols.,  London,  1882-1885  (97,  107) 
Murray-Ansley  (Mrs.  J.  C),  Some  Accounts  on  Primitive  Dances  in  Africa, 

Asia,  and  Europe,  in  Folklore  Journal,  1887,  vol.  v.  p.  251  (193,  207, 

210,  213) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  313 

Music  Herald,  New  York 
Musikalisches  Wochenblatt,  Leipzig 

Musters  (George  Charvarth),  At  Home  with  the  Patagonians,  London,  1873 
(54,  127,  135,  195) 

Nachtigal  (Gustav),  Sahara  and  Sudan,  2  vols.,  Berlin,  1879-81  (116,  205) 

Nansen  (Fridtjof),  The  First  Crossing  of  Greenland,  2  vols.,  London,  i8go  (59) 

Nautical  Magazine,  London 

Nebel  (Carl),  Voyage  dans  Mexique,  Paris,  1836  (49,  138) 

Nell  (Louis),  An   Introductory  Paper  on  the  Investigation  on  Singhalese 

Music,  in  yoiirnal  of  the  Ceylon  Branch,  Roy.  As.  Soc.,  1856-58,  p.  200 

(22,  152) 
New  Review,  edited  by  A.  Grove,  London 
Niebuhr   (Carsten),  Reisebeschreibung  nach  Arabien,  und  andern  umliegen- 

den  Landern,  3  vols.,  3  Bd.  by  j.  N.  Gloyer  u.  J.  Olshausen,  Kopen- 

hagen, 1774-1837  (162,  203) 
Nisbet  (J.  F.)  Marriage  and  Heredity,  London,  i88g  (280) 
Notes  and  Queries  on  China  and  Japan,  Hong  Kong 

Oldfield  (Augustus),  On  the  Aborigines  of  Australia,  in  Transaction  of  the 

London  Ethnolog.  Society,  new  series,  vol.  iii.,  1865,  p.  215  (171,  191, 

211) 
Oriental  Collections,  edited  by  Sir  W.  Ouseley,  London,  1797-1799 
Ouseley  (W.),  Anecdotes  of  Indian  Musick,  in  Oriental  Collect.,  vol.  i.  p.  70 

(18,  19) 
Oxford  Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels,  compiled  from  the  Library  of 

the  Earl  of  Oxford,  2  vols.,  London,  1745 

Palgrave  (William  Gifford),  Narrative  of  a  Year's  Journey  through  Arabia, 
2  vols.,  London,  Cambridge,  1865  (23) 

Panchkari  Banerjea  (Panchkadi  Vandyopadhyaya),  History  of  Hindu  Music, 
Bhowanipore,  1880  (259) 

Park  (Mungo),  Travels  in  the  Interior  District  of  Africa,  Pinkcrt.  Collect., 
vol.  xvi.  (92,  99,  107,  117,  121,  124) 

Parker  (Samuel),  Journal  of  an  Exploring  Tour  beyond  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains, Ithaca,  1838  (172) 

Parkyns  (Mansfield),  Life  in  Abyssinia,  2  vols.,  London,  1853  (240) 

Parry  (C.  H.),  Dance  Rhythm,  in  Grove's  Diet.,  iv.  p.  605  (236) 

Parry  (William  Edward),  Journal  of  a  Voyage  for  the  Discovery  of  a  North- 
west Passage,  London,  1821-24  (59) 

Pechuel-Lcesche,  see  Guessfeldt 

Pennant  (Thomas),  Tour  in  Scotland,  in  Pinkcrt.  Collect.,  vol.  iii.  (120) 

Pennell  (Elizabeth  Robins),  A  Gipsy  Piper,  in  Journ.  Gipsy  Lore  Soc,  ii.  p. 
266  (98) 

Peron  (M.),  Historical  Relation  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Southern  Islands,  Pinkcrt. 
Collect.,  vol  xi.  (165) 


314  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Perouse,  sec  Galaup 

Perrin  du   Lac,   Reise  in   den   beiden    Louisianen,   1801-1803,   in   jfoiini.  f. 

L.  u.  S.,  i.  pp.  bo,  89  (193,  219) 
Peschel  (Oskar  Ferdinand),  Volkerkunde,  2nd  edition,  Leipzig,  1875  (37) 
Petermann,    tlber    die   Musik    der    Armenier,   in   Zcitschrift    der   dcuischcn 

morgcnldnd.  GcscUschaft,  vol.  v.,  Leipzig,  1851  (87,  1S3) 
Petermann  (Dr.  A.),  Mittheilungen  aus  Justus  Perthes  Geograpli.  Anstalt., 

Gotha,  1879 
Petherick  (J.),  Egypt,  the  Sudan,  and  Central  Africa,   London,  Edinburgh, 

1S61  (87,  178) 
Pfeifter  (Ida  Laura),   The  Latest  Travels  of  I.  P.,  inclusive   Madagascar, 

trans!.,  London,  1861  (15,  75,  167,  201) 

A  Lady's  Second  Voyage  round  the  World,  2- vols.,  London,  1855  (26, 

224,  228) 

A  Lady's  Travels  round  the  World,  London,  1852  (17) 

Philosophical  Review,  edited  by  J.  G.  Schurman,  Boston,  Massachusetts 

Philosophical  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London 

Pigafetta,  Voyage  round  the  World,  first  voyage  1519-1522,  Piuko-t.  Collect., 

xi.  (27,  115,  128) 
Pinkerton  (John),  A  General  Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels,  17  vols., 

London, 1808 
Ploss  (Hermann  Heinrich),  Das  Kind,  2  vols.,  Stuttgart,  1876  (i6g,  178,  179) 

Das  Weib  in  der  Natur  und  Volkerkunde,   2nd  Aufl.,  edited  by  M. 

Bartels,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1887  (169) 
Pogge  (Paul),  Im  Reiche  des  Muata  Jamwo,  in  Beitrdgc  zur  Eiitdcckungs- 

gcsch.  Afrikas,  3rd  Heft,  Berlin,  1880  (109,  117,  122,  131) 
Pont-Grave  du,  sec  Monts 

Poole  (Francis),  Queen  Charlotte  Islands,  London,  1872  (176) 
Portman  (M.  V.),  Andamanese  Music,  in  jfoiirti.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  new  series, 

vol.    XX.    p.    181,    London,    iSSS    (75,    76,    87,    142,    152,    174,    181, 

278) 
Powell  (Wilfred),  Wanderings  in  a  Wild  Country,   London,   1883  (95,  97, 

120,  125) 
Powers  (Stephen),  Tribes  of  California,  in  C(;)«/;'/&;(//o«5  to  Nortli  American 

Ethnology,  vol.  iii.,  Washington,  1877  (45,  47,  48,  72,  261) 
Prescott  (William  H.),  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico,  London,  1878 

(49,  138) 

History  of  the  Conquest  of  Peru,  3  vols.,  London,  1878  (53) 

Preyer    (William),    tjber    die    Grenzen    der    Tonwarnehmung,    in    Physiol. 
Abhandl.,  Jena,  1876  (237) 

tJber  den   Ursprung  des  Zahlbegrift's   aus    dem   Tonsinn,    in    Kcenig, 

Beitrdgc  (237) 
Price  (Julius  M.),  Across  Mongolia,  in  Ilhistr.  London  Neics,   14th  Nov., 

1889,  vol.  xcix.  (23) 
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  London 
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  London 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  315 

Proyart  (Abbe),  History  of  Loango,  Kakongo,  and  other  Kingdoms  of 
Africa,  Pinkcrt.  Collect.,  xvi.  {89,  167) 

QuANDT  (C),  Nachrichten  von  Surinam,  in  Joitrual  f.  L.  mid  S.,  Bd.  v.  p.  i 

(196) 
Quarterly  Review  (The),  London 

Rafp^les  (Thomas  Stamford),  The  History  of  Java,  London,  1S17  (24,  84, 

135,  225,  260) 
Rameau  (Jean  Philippe),  Traite  d  THarmonie,  Paris,  1722  (145) 
Ratzel  (Friedrich),  Volkerkunde,  3  vols.,  Leipzig,  1885-88  (33,  59,  87,  88, 

117,  122,  124,  126,  127,  132-134,  146,  178,  189,  2og) 
Reade  (W.  Winwood),The  African  Sketch-book,  2  vols.,  London,  1873  (166) 

Savage  Africa,  London,  1863  (216) 

Reissmann  (Mendel),  Musikalisches   Conversations   Lexicon,   11   vols.,   2nd 

edition,  Berlin,  18S0-81  (17) 
Rengger  (Johann  Rudolph),  Naturgeschichte  der  Satigethiere  von  Paraguay, 

Basel,  1830  (241) 
Revue  Africaine,  Journal  des  travaux   de  la  Societe   Historique  Algerienne, 

1871-80,  Alger,  Paris,  Constantine 
Revue  Philosophique  de  la  France  et  de  I'Etranger,  dirigee  par  Th.  Ribot, 

Paris 
Ribot  (Theodule),  L'heredite  psychologique,  2me  ed.,  Paris,  1882  (265) 
Richard,    History  of   Tonquin,  in   Pinkcrt.   Collect.,  vol.   ix.,   transl.    (137, 

207) 
Richardson   (Rev.  J.),   Malagazy,   "  Tonon-Kira "'    and    Hymnology,  in   the 

Antananarivo  Annual  and  Madagascar  Magazine,  No.  ii.,  Christmas, 

1876,  p.  23  (14) 
Riebeck  (Emil),  Die  Hiigelstamme  von  Chittagong,  Berlin,  1885  (122) 

Die  Sammlung  des  Herrn,  Dr.   E.   R.,  xxi.  Tafeln.,  Berlin,  1S84  (122) 

Rink  (H.  I.),  Tales  and  Traditions  of  the  Eskimo,  Edinburgh,  London,  1875 

(60) 

Rochon  (Alexis  Marie),  Vovage  a  Madagascar  et  aux  Indes  Orientales  (Ger- 
man edition,  1792),  Paris,  1791  (113,  206) 

Romanes  (George  John),  Animal  Intelligence,  Intern.  Sc.  Ser.,  vol.  xli., 
London,  1882  (244) 

Mental  Evolution  in  Animals,  with  a  posth.  Essay  on  Instinct  by  C- 

Darwin,  London,  1883  (270) 
Romilly  (H.  H.),  The  Western  Pacific  and  New  Guinea,  London,  1S87  (31) 
Rosenberg  (C.   B.   H.  von),   Reistochten  naar  de  Geelvinkbaai    op    Nieuw- 

Guinea,  in  Inst,  voor  de  Taal-Laiid-en  Volkenkimdc  van  Nedcrl.  Indie, 

1875  (102, 192) 
Rousseau  (Jean),  Traite  de  la  Viole,  Paris,  1687  (129) 
Rowbotham  (John  Frederick),  A  History  of  Music,  3  vols.,  London,  1885-87 

(127) 
Royse  (N.  K.),  A  Study  of  Genius,  Chicago,  New  York,  1891  (266,  267) 


3l6  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC, 

Riihlmann  (J.),  Die  Geschichte  der  Bogeninstrumente,   Braunschweig,  1882 
(130) 

Sabine  (Edward),  Die  Eskimos  auf  der  Westkuste  von  Gronland,  in  Journ. 

f.  L.  mid  Sccrcisa,  xxxiii.  (58) 
Sainte-Croix  (Pel.  Renonard  de),  Reise  nach  Ostindien,  1803,  in  Journal  f. 

L.  II.  S.,  Bd.  xi.  and  xii.  (207) 
Saint  John  (Sir  Spenser),  Life  in  the  Forests  of  the  Far  East,  2nd  edition, 

2  vols.,  London,  1863  (122,  134,  218) 
Salvado  (Radesindo),  Voyage  en  AustraHa,  transl.  from  the  ItaHan,  Paris, 

Wassy,  i86i(  39,  88) 
Sampson  (John),  EngHsh  Gipsy  Songs  and  Rhymes,  in  yoiirn.  of  the  Gipsy 

Lore  Soc,  ii.  p.  80  (63) 
Sartorius  (Christian  Carl),  Zustand  der  Musik  in  Mexiko,  in  Cdcilia,  vol.  vii., 

Mainz,  1828,  p.  199  (50,  94) 
Saurindramohana    Thakura,    Hindu    Music,    Calcutta,    1875    (for    private 

circulation    only)   (142) 
Schadenberg  (Dr.  Alexander),  Uber  die  Negritos  der  Philippinen,  in  Zcitschr. 

f.  Ethn.,  1880,  vol.  xii.  p.  145  (iSo) 
Schauenburg  (Edward),  Reisen  in  Central  Afrika  von  M.  Park  bis  auf  E. 

Vogel,  3  vols.,  Lahr,  1859-67  (8,  112) 
Schefferus  (Joannes),  The  History  of  Lapland,  transl.  from  the  Latin,  Oxford, 

1674  (74,  no) 
Schelling  (Dr.  O.),  Musik  und  Tanz  der  Papuas,  in  Globus,  vol.  Ivi.  No.  vi. 

p.  81  (70,  73,  93,  97,  102,  171,  210,  218) 
Scherzer  (Carl   von),   Aus  dem    tropischen    Amerika.      Ein    Skizzenbuch, 

Leipzig,  1864  (138) 
Scheube  (Dr.  B.),  Die  Ainos,  in  Mitthcilnngcn  d.  dcutsch.  Gcs.  f.  Ostasicii, 

Bd.  iii.,  26  Heft,  Feb.,  1882,  and  Bd.  iii.,  22  Heft,  Dec,  1880,  p.  44  (23, 87) 
Schlagintweit  (Robert  von),  Californien,  Coin,  1871  (22S) 
Schomburgk  (Robert),  On  the  Natives  in  Guiana,  in  Journal  of  the  Ethuol. 

Soc.  London,  vol.  i.,  1848,  pp.  253,  273  (95,  173) 
Schoolcraft  (Henry  Rowe),  Historical  and  Statistical  Information  Respecting 

the  Indian  Tribes  of  the  U.S.A.,  2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1851-60  (135, 

161,  207,  212) 
Schroder  (Joh.  Joach),  Thesaurus  linguae  Armenicae,  Amsterdam,  1711  (183) 
Schulz  (Aurel),  Reise  nach  Madagaskar,  in  Zcitschr.  f  Ethn.,  vol.  xii.  p.  192 

Schulze  (Captain),  Uber  Ceram  und  seine  Bewohner,  in  Zcitschr.  f.  Ethn., 

vol.  ix.  (27) 
Schiirmann  (C.  W.),  Teichelmann  (G.  C),  Outlines  of  a  Grammar  of  the 

Aboriginal  Language  of  South  Australia,  Adelaide,  1840  (167) 
The  Port  Lincoln  Tribe,  in  Woods'  Tlic  Nat.  Tribes  of  Australia  (159, 

163,  209) 
Schiitt  (Otto  H.),  Reisen  im  siidwestlichen  Becken  des  Congo,  in  Bcitrdge 

zur  Entdeckungsg.  Africas,  Heft  iv.,  Berlin,  1881  (69) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED,  317 

Schwatka  (Frederick),  Among  the  Apaches,  in  Century  Magazine,  May,  1887, 

vol.  xxxiv.  p.  41,  New  York  (46,  73,  128) 
Schweinfurth  (Georg),  The  Heart  of  Africa,  3rd  edition,  2  vols.,   London, 

1878  (7,  9,  68,  91,  99,  127,  131) 
Seemann  (Berthold),  Narrative  of  the  Voyage  of  Herald,  1845-185 1,  2  vols., 

London, 1853 
Shaw  (Thomas),  Travels,  or  Observations  Relating  to  Barbary  andthe  Levant, 

Oxford,  1738  (13,  129) 
Shooter  (Joseph),  The  Kafirs  of  Natal  and  the  Zulu  Country,  London,  1857 

(77-  123,  167) 
Shortland  (Edward),  Traditions  and   Superstitions  of  the  New  Zealanders, 

London,  1854  (43) 
Shortt  (John),  The  Hill  Tribes  of  the  Neilgherries,  in  Transact,  of  the  Etiniol. 

Soc.,  new  series,  vol.  vii.  p.  230,  London,  i86g  (20,  207) 

An  Account  of  the  Supposed  Aborigines  of  Southern   India,  in  ibid., 

vol.  iii.  p.  373,  1865 
Sibree  (Rev.  James,  Junior),  Children  Songs  and  Games  of  the  Malagasy,  in 

Folklore  Journal,  vol  i.  p.  97,  1883  (14) 
Siebold  (Heinrich  v.),  Ethnologische  Studien  iiber  die  Aino,  in  Zeitschr.  f. 

EthnoL,  vol.  xiii.  suppl.  2,  p.  48,  1881  (87,  163,  176) 
Siebold  (Ph.  Fr.  von),  see  Kueftner 
Simmel  (Georg),  Psychologische  und  ethnologische  Studien  iiber  Musik,  in 

Zcitschriftfilr  Volkerpsychologic,  vol.  xiii.,  1882  (73,  237) 
Smith  (Edmond  Renel),  The  Araucanians,  New  York,  1855  (120) 
Smith   (Eli),  A  Treatise  on  Arab  Music,  chiefly  from  a  work  by  Mikhail 

Meshakah,  transl.    from  the  Arabic   by   E.    S.,   in   yourn.   American 

Orient.  Soc,  vol.  i.  No.  iii.  p.  171,   1847   ('^he  whole  vol.  publ.   1849) 

(154) 
Smith  (Captain  John),  The  General  History  of  Virginia,  New  England,  and 

the  Summer  Isles,  Pinkert.  Collect.,  vol.  xiii.  ^103) 
Smyth  (R.  Brough),  The  Aborigines  of  Victoria,   London,  187S  (190,  206, 

217) 
Snow  (William  Parker),  A  Two  Years'  Cruise  off  Tierra  del  Fuego,  2  vols., 

London,  1S57  (S^) 
Souriau  (Paul),  L'Esthetique  du  monoement,  Paris,  1889  (273) 
Soyaux  (Herman),  Aus  West  Africa,  Leipzig,   1879  (13,  62,  100,   iii,  117, 

123,  126,  127,  140,  146) 
Spaulding   (H.   G.),   Under  the    Palmetto,   in   the   Continental  Monthly  for 

August,  1863  (61) 
Speke  (J.  H.),  sec  Grant 
Spencer    (Herbert),    On  the    Origin   and    Function   of   Music,    ist,  Eraser's 

Magazine,  vol.  Ivi.  p.  396,  October,  1857,   2nd,  Mind,  October,  1890 

(239,  246) 

Essays,  3  vols.,  London,  1891  (256) 

Spix  (J.  B.),  see  Martius 

Spohr  (Louis),  Selbstbiographie,  Cassel,  Gottingen,  1860-61  (150,  247) 


3I»  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Sproat  (Gilbert  Malcolm),  Scenes  and  Studies  of  Savage  Life,  London,  1868 

(45,  166,  172,  227) 
Stainer  (Sir  John),  Music  in  its  Relation  to  the  Intellect  and  the  Emotions, 

London,  1892  (231) 
Stainer  (Sir  John),  Mackie  (S.  J.),  Great  Paul,  1882  (106) 
Stanley  (Henry  H.  Morton),  Coamissie  and  Magdala,  London,  1874  (14) 

In  Darkest  Africa,  2  vols.,  London,  1890  (11) 

Stavorinus,  Account  of  Java  and  Batavia,  transl.  from  the  Dutch,  in  Pinkcrt. 

Collect.,  vol.  xi.  (105) 
Stearns  (R.  E.  C),  Music  in  Nature,  in  American  Naturalist,  1890  (30) 
Stedmann(J.  G.),  Narrative  of  an  Expedition  against  the  Negroes  ofSurimam, 

2  vols.,  London,  1806  (S3,  93,  96) 
Steinen  (Carl  von  den),  Durch  Central-Brazilian,  Leipzig,  1886  (56,  57,  93) 
Stephens  (John  L.),  Incidents  of  Travel  in  Yucatan,  2  vols.,  London,  1843 

(103) 
Stevenson    (W.   B.),   A    Narrative    of   Twenty   Years'   Residence   in    South 

America,  3  vols.,  London,  1825  (195) 
Stumpf  (Carl),  Lieder  der  Bellakula  Indianer,  in  Vicrtelj.  f.  Miisikw.,  vol.  ii. 

p.  405,  1886  (143,  151,  152,  153,  159) 
Musikpsychologie  in  England,  in  Vicrtcljalirs.  Miisikiv.,  3t  Heft,  1S85 

(246) 

Tonpsychologie,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1883-90  (78,  79,  249) 

Sturt  (Capt.  Chas.  H.),  Narrative  of  an  Expedition  into  Central  Australia, 

1844-46,  2  vols.,  London,  1849  (222) 
Sully  (James),  Outlines  of  Psychology,  2nd  edition,  London,  1885  (231,  232) 

Animal  Music,  in  Cornhill  Magazine,  vol.  xli.  (249) 

Symes  (Michael),  Embassy  to  Ava,  in  Pinkcrt.  Collect.,  vol.  ix.  p.  426  (16,  17, 

22,  137) 
Taplin  (George),  The  Narrinyeri,  in  Woods'  The  Nat.  Tribes  of  Australia 

(171,  186,  201) 
Taylor  (Rev.  Richard  Cowling),  Te  Ika  a  Mami,  London,  1870  (41,  94,  177, 

201,  213,  229) 
Tennent,  vicle  Emerson 
Thewrewk  de  Ponor  (Emil),  The  Origin  of  the  Hungarian  Music,  in  Joiirn. 

Gipsy  Lore  Soe.,  vol.  i.  p.  313,  1889  (63) 
Thomson  (Joseph),  To  the  Central  African  Lakes  and  Back,  2  vols.,  London, 

1881  (1S2,  216) 

In  the  H^rt  of  Africa,  London,  1887  (78) 

Thunberg  (C.  P.),  An  Account  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  Pinkcrt.  Collect., 

xvi.  (3,  no,  121) 
Tombe  (Charles  Fran9ois)  Voyage  aux  Indes  Orientales,  2  vols.,  Paris,  iSii 

(128,  224) 
Topinard  (Paul),  L'Anthropologie,  in  Bihliotheqtic  des  sciences  coiitentp.,  vol. 

iii.,  Paris  (65) 
Etude  sur  les  races  indigenes  de  I'Australia,  Paris,  1872  (38,  146,  177) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  319 

Torquemada  (Juan  de),  la  (Ula)  Parte  de  los  veynte  y  un  libros  rituales  y 

Monarchia  Indiana,  3  vols.,  Sevilla,  1615  (49,  138) 
Torrance  (G.  W.),  Music  of  the  Australian  Aborigines,  in  Aiithropol.  yoiinial, 

vol.  xvi.  p.  335  (146) 
Townsend  (John  K.),  Narrative  of  a  Journey  across  the  Rocky  Mountains  to 

the  Columbia  River,  Philadelphia,  1839  (172) 
Traill  (Thomas  Stewart),  On  a  Peruvian  Musical  Instrument,  in  Transact,  of 

the  Roy.  Soc.  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  xx.  p.  121  (96,  152) 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  Edinburgh 
Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society,  London 

Tromp  (H.),  Dajaken-Gedichte,  in  Globus,  vol.  liii.  No.  xiv.  p.  218,  1888  (25) 
Tschudi,   Peru,   Reiseskizzen    aus  den  Jahren    1838-42    2   vols.,   St.   Gallen, 

1846  (50) 
Tuckey  (Capt.  James  H.),   Narrative  of  an  Expedition  to  the  River  Zaire 

(Congo)  in  1816,  London,  1818  (7,  loi,  104,  121,  178) 
Turner  (George),  Samoa,  preface  by  E.  B.  Tylor,  London,  1884  (86,  97,  146, 

175,  202,  213) 

Nineteen  Years  in  Polynesia,  London,  1S61  (97,  175,  180,  202,  213) 

Turner  (W.  Y.),  On  the  Ethnology  of  the  Motu,  in  Authrop.  Jouru.,  vol.  vii. 

p.  482  (28) 
Turpin,  History  of  Siam,  in  Pinkcrt.  Collect.,  vol.  ix.,  transl.  from  the  French, 

2  vols.,  Paris,  177 1  (20,  70) 
Tylor  (E.  B.),  The  Bow  as  Origin  of  Stringed  Instruments,  in  Nature,  vol. 
.   xlv.  p.  184,  Dez.,  1891  (126) 

Anthropology,  London,  1881  (274,  275) 

The  Study  of  Customs,  in  Macinillan's  Magazine,  May,  1882,  London 

(92) 

Primitive  Culture,  2  vols.,  London,  1S71  (80,  173,  185) 

Researches  into  the  Early  History  of  Mankind,  3rd  edition,  London, 

1878  (161) 

Ungarische  Monatschrift  fiir  Politik,  Pest 

Uphain    (Edward),   The   Mah^vansi,   transl.   from    the   Singhalese,   3   vols., 

London,  1833  (21) 
Upton  (G.  P.),  Woman  in  Music,  Boston,  1S80  (208) 
Urville  (d'),  see  Dumont 

Valle  (Pietro  delle),  Travels  in  Persia,  in  Pinkert.  Collect.,  vol.  ix.  (71) 
Veth  (Pieter  Jan),  Java,  3  vols.,  Haarlem,  1875-82  (24,  135) 
Vierteljahrsschrift  fiir  Musikwissenschaft,  edited  by  Spitta  and  Chrysander, 

Leipzig 
Vierteljahrsschrift  fur  wissenschaftliche  Philosophie,  Leipzig 
Villoteau  (Guillaume  Andre),  De  I'etat  actuel  de  Part  musical  en  Egypte, 

part  iv.  of  the  work  :  Description  de  VEgypte,  Paris,  1812  (iSg,  262) 
V^irchow  (Rudolf),  The  Veddas  of  Ceylon,  in  Journ.  of  the  Ceylon  Br.  Roy. 

As.  Soc,  vol.  ix.  No.  xxxiii.  p.  349,  1887  (22) 


320  PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 

Vogt  (Carl),  Zoologische  Briefe,  2  Bde.,  Frankfort  a.  M.,  185 1  (237) 
Voice  for  South  America  (A),  London 

Wagener  (Dr.  G.),  Bemerkungen  iiber  die  Theorie  der  Chinesischen  Musik, 

in  Mitthcilungen  d.  deutscli.  GcscJl.  f.  Ostosicii,   12   Heft,  pp.  42-61, 

Mai,  1877  (16,  84,  157) 
Wagner  (Richard),  Gesammelte  Schriften  und  Dichtungen,  lo  Bde.,  Leipzig, 

1871-83  (187,  214) 
Waitz  (Theodor),  Anthropologic  der  Naturvblker,  6  vols.,  Leipzig,  1859-72 

(vol.  V.  part  ii.  and  vol.  \\.  by  Garland)  (6,  12,  37,  38,  53,  59,  74,  75, 

87,  92,  116,  127,  165,  212) 
Walker  (John),  The  Melody  of  Speaking,  London,  1789  (257) 
Wallace  (Alfred  Russell),  A  Narrative  of  Travels  on  the  Amazon  and  Rio 

Negro,  ist  edition,  London,  1853,  2nd  edition,  1889  (^56,  75,  93,  loi, 

103) 
— • —  The  Malay  Archipelago,  loth  edition,  London,  1890  (29) 

Darwinism,  London,  1889  (243,  270,  278) 

Wallaschek  (Richard),  tJber  die  Bedeutung  der  Aphasie  fiir  den  musikalischen 

Ausdruck,  in  Vicrtclj.  f.  Musikivisscnschaft,  vii.  Heft  i.,  Jahrg.,  1891 

(241,  248) 

Das  musikalische  Gedachtnis  bei  Katalepsie,  im  Traum,  in  der  H}'pnose, 

in  Viertclj.f.  Miisikzv.,  viii.  Heft  iii.,  Jahrg.,  1892  (57) 
Weber  (Ernst  von),  Vier  Jahre  in  Afrika,   1871-1873,  2  Thl.,  Leipzig,   1878 

(4,5) 
Webster  (W.  H.  B.),  sec  H.  Foster 

Weddell  (H.  Algernon),  Voyage  dans  le  Nord  de  la  Bolivie,  Paris,  1853  (52) 
Weismann  (August),  Essays  upon   Heredity  and  Kindred  Biological   Pro- 
blems, transl.,  Oxford,  1889,  2nd  edition,  i8gi  (263,  269) 
Gedanken  iiber  Musik  bei  Thieren  und  beim   Menschen,  in  Deutsche 

Rundschau,  i  Heft,  1890  (249) 
Westermarck  (Edward),  The  History  of  Human   Marriage,   London,    1891 

(245) 
Westphal  (Rudolf),  Die  Musik  des  griechischen  Alterthumes,  Leipzig,  1883 

(144) 
Whymper  (Frederick),   Travel  and  Adventure  in   the  Territory   of  Alaska, 

London,  1868  (47) 
Wied-Neuwied( Maximilian  A.  Ph.  Prinz  zu),  Reisenach  Brazilien,  1815-1817, 

abstract  irCJourn.f.  L.  mid  Seereiscii,  xxxv.,  2  Bde.,  Frankfort  a.  M., 

1820-21  (73) 

Reisen  in  das  innere  Nord-America,  1832-1834,  abstract  in  Jouvn.  f.  L. 

und  S.,  vol.  xli.,  2  Bde.,  Coblenz,  1839-41  (55,  93,  103,  168) 
Wilkes  (Ch.),  Narrative  of  the  United  States  Explor.  Exped.  during  1838-42, 

5  vols.,  London,  1845  (29.  3°,  32,  34.  37-  53,  57>  58,  62,  73,  76,  86,  95, 

loi,  141,  168,  186) 
Wilkinson   (Sir  John   Gardner),    Ancient   Egyptians,    new  edition,  3   vols., 

London,  1878  (125,  152,  221) 


AUTHORITIES    QUOTED.  321 

Willard  (N.   Augustus),  A  Treatise  on  the  Music  of  Hindostan,  Calcutta, 

1834  (144) 
Williams  (Thomas),  Calvert  (James),  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  and  Missionary 

Labours  among  the  Cannibals,  London,  1870  (29,30,  95,  97,  101,  log, 

120,  141,  146,  186) 
Williams  (Wells),  The  Middle  Kingdom,  2  vols..  New  York,  1883  (16,  17,  155) 
Wilson  (Daniel),  Pre-Historic  Man,  3rd  edition,  London,  1876  (29,  81,  82) 
Wissmann  (Hermann  v.),  Unter  deutscher  Flagge  quer  durch  Afrika,  1880-83, 

Berlin,  1889  (104,  115) 
My  Second  Journey  through  Equatorial  Africa    in  1886-87  (German 

edition,  1890),  London,  i8gi  (117) 
Witchell  (Charles  A.),  The  Evolution  of  Bird-Song,  in   The  Zoologist,  3rd 

ser.,  vol.  xiv.  No.  clxiii.,  July,  1890  (247) 
Wood  (Rev.  J.  G.),  The  Natural  History  of  Man,  2  vols.,  London,  1868-70 

(I,  4,  8,  9,  29,  42,  58) 
Woods  (J.  D.),  The  Native  Tribes  of  South  Australia,  Adelaide,  1879 
Wyatt,  sec  Gill 

Yule   (Henry),  A   Narrative  of  the  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava  in  1855, 
London,  1S58  (137) 

Zedtwitz  (Freiherr  von),  Japanesische  Musikstucke,  in  Mitfkcilg.  d.  deutsch. 

Gesell.f.  Ostasien,  Bd.  iv.  Heft  xxxiii.,  Aug.,  1885,  p.  128,  Heft  xxxii., 

Mar.,  1885,  p.  107  (17) 
Zeitschrift  der  deutschen  morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  Leipzig 
Zeitschrift  fiir  die  Kunde  des  Morgenlandes,  Bonn,  ed.  by  Lassen 
Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie,  Berlin 

Zeitschrift  fur  Volkerpsychologie,  edited  by  Lazarus  und  Steinthal,  Berlin 
Zimmermann    (W.    F.    A.,    pseud.,    i.e.,    W.    F.    Volliner),  Die   Inseln   des 

indischen  und  stillen  Meeres,  Berlin,  1863-65  (27,  29,  30,  90,  141) 
Zimmermann  (Robert),  ^sthetik,  2  vols.,  Wien,  1858-65  (232) 
Zbllner    (Heinrich),    Einiges   iiber    sudanesische     Musik,    in    Miisikalisches 

Wochcnblatt,  1885,  vol.  xvi.  No.  xxxvii.  p.  446  (76,  159) 
Zoologist  (The),  edited  by  J.  E.  Harting,  London 
Zwaardemaker  (H.),  Der  Verlust  an  hohen  Tonen  mit  zunehmendem  Alter, 

in  Archiv  f.  Olivcnheilk,  Bd.  xxxii.,  1891,  pp.  53-56  (240) 


I  N  D  E  X. 


Abongo,    ----- 

Abyssinia,  .         .         -         - 

Academy  of  Music,  Mexico, 

Admiralty  IsL,  mus.  talent  of 
the  natives, 

Aduma,     ----- 

Albci'tis  (d'),  his  singing  to  the 
Papuans,    -         -         -         - 

Alkoran,  singing  of  the,     - 

Alphabet  with  music, 

Andamanese  songs,  - 

Annotation  (modern)  of  primi- 
tive music  in  Java  25,  China 
25,  Maori  42,  Papuans, 

Amantas, 

Amnnaya, 

Aona, 

Apaclics  dance, 

Australia,  singing, 

Aztecs, 

Badagas, 
Bahama  song,   - 
Balafo,      - 
Bargain  with  music 
Bechuana,  singing. 
Bedouins,  mus.  talest. 
Belts  of  beads,  dances  with, 
Benin,  funer.  songs, 
Bibo,          ...         - 
Birds  and  instruments, 
Bonang,    -         -         -         - 
Bongo  singing, 
Boundaw, 
Branle  de  Capucins,  resemblance 
to, 


PAGE 
8 


Bribbun,   - 

Bridgman,  Laura, 
226  ;  Buluperindu, 

Burma  Royal  Librarj', 
29    Bushe-Bushe,    - 
10  ]  Bushmen,  dancing 

28  i  Cala-Mala, 

12    Callahuayas,     - 
g  :  Can-can,  resemblance  to,  - 

2A  '  Cannibals,  Europeans  taken  for, 
Caracasha,  -  .  -  - 
Cassuto,    ----- 

-o    Celebes, 

52    Cellalika, 

gS  ',  Ceram,  song,  instrument,  - 


58 


19 

62 

iiS 

59 

5 

13 

205 

8 

28 

123 

105 

7 

137 


PAGE 
124 

100 
22 


Charra, 
^6    Chichikone,  note  7,  - 
26    China  hymn  16,  music  council, 
.g  I  Circle  dances,    .         -         -         . 

Classification  of  races  according 
to  music  systems, 

Conductor,    Indians   54,    Africa 
135,  South  Sea,  Australia, 

Copyright  among  savages, 

Corrobberree,    -         -         -         - 

Coal  of  fire,  dances  with,  - 

Crwth  (Welsh), 

Crying-amusement  of  theMaoris, 


Dahomey  rhapsodist, 
Damaras,  memory  5,  singing,    - 
Dances,  their  relation  to  mar- 
riage, Africa  127,  Sumatra, 
Dancing  girls,  Indian, 
Dembo  bands,  -         -         .         - 


98 


26 

122 

27 

125 

103 

17 

194 

64 

136 

69 

37 
194 
130 
229 


225 
203 
132 


(323) 


324 


PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 


Deux  a  deux  — dance, 
Dombra,  - 
Douron,    - 

Drawings  of  savages, 
Duel,  musical,  - 
Dyaks,  art  and  music, 

E-Karakia, 

Embuchi,  - 

Erbab, 

Eskimo  songs,  - 

European  music,  effect  of,  in 
Papua  28,  Fiji  29,  30,  31, 
Aduma  10,  Tonga  32,  Pit- 
cairn  34,  Tahiti  35,  Abipones 
53,  Tierra  del  Fuego  58, 
Bushmen,  Fuegians,  Tonga 
88,  Australia,  Hapai,  Loan- 
go,  West  Africa  89,  mouth 
harmonica  90,  Ashongo  108, 
Australia     164,     of     tam- 


PAGE 

igo 
123 
125 

281 
60 
25 


[06,  165 


Fairies,  Maori,  -         .         -         . 
Families  of  musicians, 
Fango-Fango,  -         -         .         . 
Features,  play  of,  among  Indians 
Female  parts  played  by  men  209, 

by  boys,      - 
Fiji   school    of   art    29,  artist': 

honorarium, 

Gabowie, 

Gaita, 

Gambany  Kayn, 

Gamelan, 

Games,  school  of  life, 

Ganga, 

Ganikbaya, 

Ginguva,  - 

Gipsies     influenced     by 

garians, 
Goila, 

Gorilla-dance,  - 
Griots, 
Guehues,  - 
Guinea,     - 


Hun 


241 

67,68 

68 


29 
121 

98 
135 
135 
275 
116 

133 
109 

63 


Hallelujah,   -         -         -         -  173 

Haravees,          -         -         -         -  52 

Haiiser  (Miska)  in  Tahiti,           -  35 

Hawaii  singers,          -         -         -  36 

Heem,       -         .         -         .         -  137 

He  Koauan,      -         -         -         -  94 

High  musical  council  (China),  -  17 

Hiva,         -----  31 

Hornpipe,          -          -          -          -  98 

Horse  trot  imitated  in  music,     -  21 

Huehuetl,          -         -         -      1 11,  137 

Hunju,      -----  117 

Hyperboreans,  singing,       -          -  46 

Igedegbo,         ...          -  118 
Imitation,  sec  Mimicry. 

Incas,        -----  52 
India,   Jones'    investiga.tion    of 

primitive  music,           -          -  18 
Inenga,     -         -         -         -         -  9,  10 

Ingese  beads,    ...         -  7 

Insects,  experiments  on  hearing,  238 
Instincts,   transmission  of  269, 

origin  of,    -         -          -  270 

Iroquois  songs,           -          -          -  52 

Jelle,  or  Jellemen,  -         -         -  67 
jfetvs,  ancestors  of  Indians  51, 

in  Europe,           -         -         -  62 

Japanese  speech-song,       -         -  18 

Java  music-writing,  -         -         -  25 

Juripari  or  devil's  music,  -         -  loi 

Kaba,        -         ....  28 
Kafirs,  singing  and  dancing  4, 

poetry,        .         -         .         .  g 

Kamuti,    -----  120 

Karagwe,           .         .         .         .  g 

Karok,       ....         .  47 

Kas, 117 

Katshinzi  Tatars'  songs,   -         -  23 

Keeloun,  -         -         -         -         -  116 

Keller,  Helen,   ....  259 

Kilara, 122 

Killing  dancers  who  make  mis- 
takes,         -         -         -         -  276 
Korana,     -----  q 


INDEX. 


325 


PAGE 

Korro, 124 

Kroms, 105 

Kulepaganeg,    -         -         -         -  126 

Kunting, 121 

Kurumba,           -         -         -         -  19 

Kwatscha,          -         -         -         -  126 

Kyezoup,           ...         -  137 

Langi, 31 

Lanku, 122 

Lashash, 67 

Laughter    in    connection    with 

music  and  dances,      -        -  55 

Leitmotiv,          -         -         -        10,  100 

Loinra, 58 

Lokango,           ....  122 

Lur,           .....  88 

Luzon  table  music,   -         -         -  26 

Mahari, 137 

Makalaka,          ....  8 

Makolol'o  dance,        ...  6 

Malagasy,         -         -         -        -  15 

Mala-Pioba,      -         -         -        -  gS 
Maoris — singing  41,  war-songs 

42,  fairies,  -         -         -         -  43 

Maroons, 10 

Marseillaise,  effect  of,       -        -  165 

Masques, 216 

Maya,        -----  49 

Mbira, 108 

Mendana  Arch,  song,        -         -  36 
Mimicry — Indians  45,  Tierra  del 
Fuego  57,  Hottentots  sing- 
ing classic  compositions,    -  140 

Mirrors, 55 

Mittu,        -----  9 

Modok, 47 

Mohammedan  influence  in  music,  23 

Mourning,  music  during,  -         -  8 

Mumbo  Jumbo,          .         -         .  8 
Musical  box — Wanyori  g.Inenga 

10,  Fiji,      -         -         -         -  29 

Musical  faculty,         -         -         -  283 

Music  notes,  Java,    -         -         -  25 

Nanga, 121 


)'AGE 

N'dungo,  -         -         -         -      III,  114 
Nc7v  Britain,  mus.  talent  of  the 

natives,      -         -         -         -  29 

Nilgiri  Hills,     -         -         -         -  19 

N'koko,     -         -         -         -      III,  114 

N'kungu, 123 

Nootka  Sound — Indian  singing,  46 

Nose  flutes,       -        -         -         -  92 

Nsambi, 121 

Ntawan, no 

Nzangah,           ...         -  67 

Obscenity  in  Austral,  dances,  -  201 

Oganga  (priests),       -         -         -  106 

Ombi, 106 

Ostiaks,  instrument,            -          -  22 

Ozvcn,  Prof.,  on  prehist.  instr.,  -  81 

Padatrong,      .         -         -         .  104 
Pagolo,  or  Pangolo,  -        -       74.  120 

Pahu, 107 

Pakuda, 87 

Pankho, 122 

Papuans,  music,         -         -         -  28 

Para, 121 

Paradise,  loss  of,       -         -         -  227 

Patola, 137 

Penjinski,           .         -         .          -  180 

Pepat, 137 

Picborn,    -----  98 

Pitcairn,    -----  34 

Priests,  singing  at  Tlaloe,           -  49 

Prohibition  of  savage  dances,    -  197 

Pullaway,          .         .         -         .  137 

Putura-Putura,           -         -         -  100 

Quadrille,  resemblance  to,     -  189 

Quamu,     .         -         -         -         .  94 

Quichua, 52 

Quilando,           -         -         -         -  118 

Rabekin, 121 

Realism  in  the  Chinese  drama,  -  225 
Rebaba,    -          -         -         -       129,  130 

Recitative,  impossibility  of,        -  181 

Rurerure,  -----  43 

Salayer  instruments,       -         -  26 


326 


PRIMITIVE    MUSIC. 


PAGE 

Samacueca,       -         -         -         -  53 

Samoyeds,  instruments,     -         -  22 

Samsic,     .         .         .         .         .  j^ 

Samoa  songs,    -         -         -         -  33 

Sandwich  Island  songs,     -         -  36 

Sansa,       -         .         .         .         .  122 

Siam  Latin  grammar  with  music,  20 

Simbing,  -         -         .         .          .  124 
Sinhalese     diatonic     scale    21, 

eighteen  sciences,  -  -  21 
Sitka  Sound  dance,  -  -  -  47 
Skull  as  instrument,  -  -  -  83 
Soum,  -  -  .  .  .  i^y 
Space  of  time  indicated  in  dra- 
matic actions,  -  -  -  220 
Spanish  monks  (Philippines),  -  27 
Speaking  to  oneself,  -  -  56 
Speech-song  in  Japan,  -  -  18 
Speech-song  committed  to  notes,  257 
Sticks,  musical,  -  -  -  32 
Surplus  of  vigour,  theory  of  the,  272 

Taboo,  music  to  women,   -         -  71 

Tacous,     -----  58 

Tagals,  chorus,          -         -         -  27 

Tahiti  songs,    -         -         -          -  35 

Tahiti  myth  of  the  cocoanut  tree,  193 

Tamuls, 22 

Tasmanians,  singing,          -         -  40 

Teeth  filed  with  mus.  accomp.,  -  26 

Telania, 58 

Tenge,      -----  32 

Teotihuacan,     -         -         -         -  49 

Teponaztli,        -         -         -      m,  137 

Tezcuco, 49 

Tlilinkccts,  singing,  -         -         -  46 

Thura, 102 

Tlamalhuilili,    -         -         -         .  137 

To,   -         -         -         -         -         -  120 


PAGE 

Todas, ig 

Tonga    songs    and    dances    31, 

texts  31,  composers,  -         -  32 

Topeng, 224 

Totowaka,         -         -         -         -  43 

Toztze, 118 

Trummscheidt,          -         -         -  130 

Tunkul, 138 

Turndun,  -----  124 

Turr,         -----  137 

Unseen  musicians,  -         -         -  227 

Valitra, 122 

Viard  chants,    -         -         -         -  47 

Votua, 29 

Waiata,  -----  43 

Wainos,    -----  52 

Wal-Pipe,          -         -         -         -  98 

Wanyamwezi  dances,        -         -  11 

Wanyori  mus.  box.    -         -      ,    -  9 

Wayang,  -----  224 
Whistling,  Hottentots  3,  Angola 
13,  Tonga 32,  Arabs 33,  So- 
mali 33,  Kafir,  Koossa,  Bur- 
mese 33,  wh.  language  33, 

Yaribs,       -         -         -         -  71 

Whizzer,  -----  124 

Women  as  travellers,          -         -  15 

Work  with  music,      -           11,  97,  220 

Wuwu, 74 

Yaquis, 50 

Yukas,      -         -         -         -         -  51 

Ynnias,  songs,  -         -         -         -  48 

Yurok,       -----  47 

Zebu, 27 

Zleetun, 220 

Zoot,         -----  138 


ABERDEEN    UNIVERSITY    PRESS. 


Lar^hetto. 

(Freycinet.) 

ibi  [/r   ^^mrfp'irrr^r^  irrrrrrrpi  ^>  i 

-L_4 1    UJ      1 L 

»  ^.  1  r  p  p  ^ 

P     0     0     M      \        iS         \     , 

/0\          ^ 

g>'  LTf      u  1 — 1  ^  u  u  u  1 H=i-i — 1  u  1    H 

^)^  rrffp  ifrrfp  i^^J  |Jjj-|ijJ.|JjJjJ  ii 

N9  6.  The  Bride's  Complaint.  (H?  =  V4  fiat,  x  =  14  sharp) 


Da  Capo  al  Fine. 


4 

N9  9. 


N9  10. 


N°  11.  ^    Andante 


N9  12.  Song  of  the  Huchinom. 


-fro  10         Cadenza  lenio 


rrrr  rrrr'T 


iUi 


N9  16. 


N9  17. 


N9ia 


N9  20. 

The  Company. 

The  Dancers. 


#^W^ 

m0  0a]\0      k    k^ 

if/fflr^i 

#f¥f#^ 

rrcffrr  ^ 

~i — 1 — r"t~ — ■ 

-1 — 1 — r-n 

H — i— 

J  J  jj 

^  ^yt  I — 

J  J    J  » — 

J  J  j^ 

^=1^ 

\i  i  d HI 

N9  22 


Note.  The  rising:  from  e  iog,  and  sinking-  ag-ain  from  /sr^o  e  oug^ht  to  be  expressed 
by  quarter  tones.  At  every  pause  CO\)  the  singers  are  silent  for  some  seconds,  and 
then  beg-in  again,  the  voices  rising-  by  deg-rees  from  e  to^. 


N9  25 

Gamban 

Gender 
Saron. 


^^  !77^  j-jT}  m; 


s7:^jTjijj7]  m: 


mmp}jTj: 


J^rm^[m 


^rr^jjTjm^ 


Printed  by  Breitkopf  and Hiirtel, Leipzig. 


A   CATALOGUE    OF    WORKS 

IN 

GENERAL    LITERATURE 


PUBLISHED    BY 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO. 

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  LONDON,  E.G. 

15  East  i6th  Street,  New  York. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO. 

Issue  the  undermentioned  Lists  of  their  Publications,  which  may  be  had  post  free  on 
application : — 

I.  Monthly  List  of  New  Works  and     ;     6.  Catalogue    of    School    Books    and 


New  Editions. 

2.  Quarterly      List      of      Announce- 

ments and  New  Works. 

3.  Notes  on  Books  ;  being  an  Analysis 

of  the  Works  published  during 
each  Quarter. 

4.  Catalogue  of  Scientific  Works. 

5.  Catalogue  of  Medical  and  Surgical 

Works. 


Educational  Works. 


7.  Catalogue  of  Books  for  Ele- 
mentary Schools  and  Pupil 
Teachers. 


8.  Catalogue  of  Theological  Works 

BY  Divines  and  Members  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

9.  Catalogue   of   Works   in    General 

Literature. 


ABBEY  (Rev.  Charles  J.),  and  OVERTON 
(Rev.  John   H.). 
THE    ENGLISH    CHURCH    IN    THE 
EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.     Cr.  8vo. 

75.  6d. 

ABBOTT  (Evelyn,  M.A.,  LL.D.). 

A  SKELETON  OUTLINE  OF  GREEK 

HISTORY.      Chronologically  Arranged. 

Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 
A  HISTORY  OF  GREECE. 

Part  L — From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the 
Ionian  Revolt.     Cr.  8vo.  105.  6d. 

Part  IL — 500-445  B.C.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 
HELLENICA .     A  Collection  of  Essays  on 

Greek    Poetry,   Philosophy,   History  and 

Religion.      Edited  by  Evelyn  Abbott, 

M.A.,  LL.D.     Svo.  165. 

ACLAND  (A.  H.  Dyke,  M.P.),  and  RAN- 
SOME  (Cyril,  M.A.). 
A  HANDBOOK  IN  OUTLINE  OF 
THE  POLITICAL  HISTORY  OF 
ENGLAND  TO  iSgo.  Chronologically 
Arranged.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 


ACTON  (Eliza). 
I      MODERN  COOKERY.     With  150  Wood- 
cuts.     Fcp.  Svo.  4s.  6d. 

I  AMOS  (Sheldon). 

I      A   PRIMER  OF  THE  ENGLISH  CON- 
\  STITUTION  AND   GOVERNMENT. 

Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

ANNUAL  REGISTER  {THE).     A  Review 
of  Public  Events  at  Home  and  Abroad, 
for  the  year  1891.     Svo.  i8s. 
*^*  Volumes  of  the  '  Annual  Register '  for 
the  years  1863-1890  can  still  be  had. 

ANSTEY  (F.),  Author  of 'Vice  Versa'. 

THE  BLACK  POODLE,  and  other  Stories. 
Cr.  Svo.  2s.  boards  ;  2s.  6d.  cloth. 

VOCESPOPULI.  Reprinted  from 'Punch'. 
With  Illustrations  by  J.  Bernard  Part- 
ridge, ist  Series.  Fcp.  4to.  5s.  2nd 
Series.     Fcp.  4to.  6s. 

THE  TRAVELLING  COMPANIONS. 
Reprinted  from 'Punch'.  With  Illustrations 
by  J.  Bernard  Partridge.    Post  4to.  5s. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


ARISTOTLE. 

THE  POLITICS  :  G.  Bekker's  Greek  Text 
of  Books  I.  III.  IV.  (VII.),  with  an 
English  Translation  by  W.  E.  Holland, 
M.A. ;  and  short  Introductory  Essays  by 
A.  Lang,  M.A.     Cr.  8vo.  ys.  M. 

THE  POLITICS:  Introductory  Essays. 
By  Andrew  Lang.  (From  Holland  and 
Lang's  '  Politics  '.)     Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

THE  ETHICS:  Greek  Text,  Illustrated 
with  Essays  and  Notes.  By  Sir  Alexan- 
der Grant,  Bart.     2  vols.     8vo.  325. 

THE  NICOMACHEAN  ETHICS :  Newly 
Translated  into  English.  By  Robert 
Williams.     Cr.  8vo.  75.  6d. 

ARMSTRONG  (G.  F.  Savage-). 

POEMS  :  Lyrical  and  Dramatic.  Fcp.  8vo. 
65. 

KING  SAUL.  (The  Tragedy  of  Israel, 
Part  I.)     Fcp.  8vo.  55. 

KING  DAVID.  (The  Tragedy  of  Israel, 
Part  II.)     Fcp.  8vo.  6s. 

KING  SOLOMON.  (The  Tragedy  of 
Israel,  Part  III.)     Fcp.  8vo.  6s. 

UGONE  :  A  Tragedy.     Fcp.  8vo.  6s. 

A  GARLAND  FROM  GREECE  :  Poems. 
Fcp.  8vo.  7s.  6rf. 

STORIES  OF  WICKLOW  :  Poems.  Fcp. 
8vo.  7s.  6d. 

MEPHISTOPHELES  IN  BROAD- 
CLOTH: a  Satire.     Fcp.  8vo.  4s. 

ONE  IN  THE  INFINITE  :  a  Poem.  Cr. 
8vo.  7s.  6d. 

THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  ED- 
MUND J.  ARMSTRONG.  Fcp.  8vo. 
7s.  6d. 

ARMSTRONG  (Edmund  J.). 

POETICAL  WORKS.     Fcp.  8vo.  5s. 
ESSAYS  AND  SKETCHES.   Fcp.  8vo.  5s. 

ARMSTRONG  (Edward),  Queen's  College. 
Oxford. 
ELIZABETH  FARNESE  :    The  Terma- 
gant of  Spain.     8vo.  i6s. 

ARNOLD  (Sir  Edwin,  K.C.I.E.). 

THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD  :  or,  the 

Great    Consummation.       A    Poem.       Cr. 

8vo.  7s.  6d.  net. 
Presentation    Edition.      With   Illustrations 

by  W.  HoLMAN  Hunt,  &c.    4to.  20s.  net. 
SEAS  AND  LANDS.      Reprinted  letters 

from  the    'Daily  Telegraph'.       With  71 

Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
POTIPHAR'S   WIFE,  and  other  Poems. 

Cr.  8vo.  5s.  net. 
ADZUMA,or  the  Japanese  Wife.     A  Play. 

Cr.  8vo.  6s.  6(/.  net. 


ARNOLD  (T,,  D.D.),  formerly  Head  Master 
of  Rugby  School. 

INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES  ON  MO- 
DERN HISTORY.     8vo.  7s.  6d. 

MISCELLANEOUS  WORKS.  8vo.7s.6d. 

ASHLEY  (W.  J.,  M.A.). 

ENGLISH  ECONOMIC  HISTORY  AND 
THEORY.  Part  I.  The  Middle  Ages. 
Cr.  8vo.  5s.     Part  II. 

ATELIER  (THE)  DU  LYS :  or,  An  Art 
Student  in  the  Reign  of  Terror.  By  the 
Author  of  '  Mademoiselle  Mori '.  Cr. 
8vo.  2s.  6d. 

BY    THE    SAME    AuTHOR. 

MADEMOISELLE    MORI:    a    Tale    of 

Modern  Rome.     Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 
THAT   CHILD.      Illustrated  by  Gordon 

Browne.     Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 
UNDER  A  CLOUD.     Cr.  Svo.     2s.  6./. 
THE    FIDDLER    OF    LUGAU.      With 

Illustrations     by     W.      Ralston.        Cr. 

Svo.  2s.  6d. 
A    CHILD    OF    THE    REVOLUTION. 

With  Illustrations  by  C.  J.  Staniland. 

Cr.  Svo.   2s.  6d. 
HESTER'S    VENTURE  :    a  Novel.     Cr. 

Svo.   2S.  6^/. 
IN  THE  OLDEN  TIME  :  a  Tale  of  the 

Peasant    War     in    Germany.       Cr.    Svo. 

2s.  6(7. 
THE     YOUNGER     SISTER  :     a    Tale. 

Cr.  Svo.  6s. 


BACON  (Francis). 

COMPLETE   WORKS.     Edited  by  R.  L. 

Ellis,  J.  Spedding  and  D.  D.  Heath. 

7  vols.  Svo.  £^  13s.  6d. 
LETTERS   AND   LIFE,   INCLUDING 

ALL    HIS    OCCASIONAL     WORKS. 

Edited   by   J.    Spedding,      7  vols.    Svo. 

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Annotations.  By 
Richard  Whately,  D.D.     Svo.  los.  6d. 

THE  ESSAYS  :  with  Introduction,  Notes 
and  Index.  By  E.  A.  Abbott,  D.D.  2 
vols.  fcp.  Svo.  price  6s.  Text  and  Index 
only,  without  Introduction  and  Notes,  in 
I  vol.  fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

BADMINTON        LIBRARY       (THE), 

Edited  by  the  Duke  of  Beaufort,  K.G., 
assisted  by  Alfred  E.  T.  Watson. 
ATHLETICS    AND    FOOTBALL.      By 
Montague  Shearman.     With  51   Illus- 
trations.    Cr.  Svo.   10s.  6d. 

[Continuid  on  next  pngc. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,   GREEN,  &  CO. 


BADMINTON       LIBRARY      (THE)—  | 

continued.  \ 

BOATING.  By  W.  B.  WooDGATK.  With 
49  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.  105.  6J. 

COURSING  AND  FALCONRY.  By 
Harding  Cox  and  the  Hon.  Gerald 
Lascelles.  With  76  Illustrations.  Cr. 
Svo.  los.  6d. 

CRICKET.  By  A.  G.  Steel  and  the 
Hon.  R.  H.  Lyttelton.  With  63  Illus- 
trations.    Cr.  Svo.  los.  bd. 

CYCLING.  By  Viscount  Bury  (Earl  of 
Albemarle),  K.C.M.G.,  and  G.  Lacy 
Hillier.       With    89    Illustrations.       Cr. 

Svo.    IDS.    6(f. 

DRIVING.  By  the  Duke  of  Beaufort. 
With  65  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  105.  6d. 

FENCING,  BOXING  AND  WREST- 
LING. By  Walter  H.  Pollock,  F.  C. 
Grove,  C.  Prevost,  E.  B.  Michell 
and  Walter  Armstrong.  With  42 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.   10s.  bd. 

FISHING.  By  H.  Cholmondeley- 
Pennell. 

Vol.  I.  Salmon,  Trout  and  Grayling. 
With  15S  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo. 
I  OS.  bd. 

Vol.  II.  Pike  and  other  Coarse  Fish. 
With  132  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo. 
I  OS.  6(/. 

GOLF.  By  Horace  Hutchinson,  the  Rt. 
Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  Andrew 
Lang,  Sir  W.  G.  Simpson,  Bart.,  &c. 
With  8S  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 

HUNTING.  By  the  Duke  of  Beaufort, 
K.G.,  and  Mowbray  Morris.  With  53 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 

MOUNTAINEERING.  By  C.  T.  Dent, 
Sir  F.  Pollock,  Bart.,  W.  M.  Conway, 
Douglas  Freshfield,  C.  E.  Mathews, 
C.  PiLKiNGTON,  and  other  Writers.  With 
108  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6n'. 

RACING  AND  STEEPLECHASING. 
By  the  Earl  of  Suffolk  and  Berkshire, 
W.  G.  Craven,  &c.  With  56  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  Svo.  los.  bd. 

RIDING  AND  POLO.  By  Captain 
Robert  Weir,  J.  Moray  Brown,  the 
Duke  of  Beaufort,  K.G.,  the  Earl  of 
Suffolk  and  Berkshire,  &c.  With  59 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 

SHOOTING.  By  Lord  Walsingham  and 
Sir  Ralph  P.\yne-Gallwey,  Bart. 

Vol.  I.    Field  and  Covert.     With  105 

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 
Vol.  II.    Moor  and  Marsh.      With  65 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.   los.  6d. 


BADMINGTON     LIBRARY     (THE)— 

cnntinuid. 

SKATING, CURLING, TOBOGGANING 
AND  OTHER  ICE  SPORTS.  By  J.  M. 
Heathcote,  C.  G.  Tebbutt,  T.  Max- 
well WiTHAM,  the  Rev.  John  Kerr, 
Ormond  Hake  and  Colonel  Buck.  With 
2S4  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 

TENNIS,  LAWN  TENNIS,  RACKETS 
AND  FIVES.  By  J.  M.  and  C.  G. 
Heathcote,  E.  O.  Pleydell-Bouverie 
and  A.  C.  Ainger.  With  79  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 

BAGEHOT  (Walter). 

BIOGRAPHICAL  STUDIES.     8vo.  12s. 
ECONOMIC  STUDIES.     Svo.  los.  6d. 
LITERARY  STUDIES.     2  vols.  Svo.  28s. 
THE  POSTULATES  OF  ENGLISH  PO- 
LITICAL ECONOMY.     Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

BAGWELL  (Richard,  LL.D.). 

IRELAND  UNDER  THE  TUDORS. 
(3  vols.)  Vols.  I.  and  II.  From  the  first 
invasion  of  the  Northmen  to  the  year 
157S.  Svo.  32s.  Vol.  III.  1578-1603. 
Svo.   1 8s. 

BAIN  (Alexander). 

MENTAL  AND  MORAL  SCIENCE. 
Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 

SENSES  AND  THE  INTELLECT. 
Svo.   15s. 

EMOTIONS  AND  THE  WILL.    Svo.  15s. 

LOGIC,  DEDUCTIVE  AND  INDUC- 
TIVE.    Part  I.  4s.     Part  II.  6s.  6d. 

PRACTICAL  ESSAYS.     Cr.  Svo.  2s. 

BAKER  (Sir  Samuel  W.). 
EIGHT  YEARS  IN  CEYLON.     With  6 

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 
THE   RIFLE   AND   THE   HOUND  IN 
CEYLON.       6    Illustrations.       Cr.    Svo. 
3s.  6d. 

BALL  (The  Rt.  Hon.  J.  T.). 

THE  REFORMED  CHURCH  OF  IRE- 
LAND.    (1537-1889.)     Svo.  7s.  6d. 

HISTORICAL  REVIEW  OF  THE 
LEGISLATIVE  SYSTEMS  OPERA- 
TIVE  IN  IRELAND,  from  the  Invasion 
of  Henry  the  Second  to  the  Union  (1172- 
1800).     Svo.  6s. 

BARING-GOULD  (Rev.  S.). 

CURIOUS  MYTHS  OF  THE  MIDDLE 

AGES.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 
ORIGIN    AND    DEVELOPMENT    OF 

RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.     2  vols.  7s. 

BARRAUD  (Clement  William,  S.J.). 
SAINT  THOMAS    OF   CANTERBURY 
AND  SAINT  ELIZABETH  OF  HUN- 
GARY :  Historical  Dramas.    Cr.  Svo.  5s. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


BEACONSFIELD  (The  Earl  of). 

NOVELS  AND  TALES.  Cheap  Edition. 
Complete  in  ii  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  i5.  each, 
boards ;  is.  6d.  each,  cloth. 

VIVIAN  GREY. 

THE   YOUNG  DUKE,  Cs-c. 

ALROY,  IXION,  Sfc. 

CONTARINI  FLEMING,  5fc. 

HENRIETTA   TEMPLE. 

VENETIA.  T A  NCR  ED. 

CONINGSB  Y.        S  YBIL. 

LOTH  AIR.  ENDYMION. 

NOVELS  AND  TALES.  The  Hughen" 
den  Edition.  With  2  Portraits  and  ii 
Vignettes,     ii  vols.     Cr.  8vo.  425. 

BECKER  (Professor). 

GALL  US  :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the  Time 
of  Augustus.    Illustrated.   Post  8vo.  7s.  6(/. 

CHARICLES  :  or,  Illustrations  of  the 
Private  Life  of  the  Ancient  Greeks. 
Illustrated.     Post  8vo.  75.  6d. 

BELL  (Mrs.  Hugh). 

CHAMBER  COMEDIES  :  a  Collection  of 
Plays  and  Monologues  for  the  Drawing 
Room.     Cr.  8vo.  65. 
NURSERY   COMEDIES:    Twelve   Tiny 
Plays  for  Children.     Fcap.  Svo.  is.  6cL 

BENT  (J.  Theodore,  F.S.A.,  F.R.G.S.). 
THE  RUINED  CITIES  OF  MAS- 
HONALAND  :  being  a  Record  of 
Excavation  and  Exploration  in  i8gi. 
With  a  Chapter  on  the  Orientation  and 
Mensuration  of  the  Temples.  By  R.  M. 
W.  Swan.  With  5  Maps  and  Plans,  13 
Plates,  and  104  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Svo.  i8s. 

BOYD  (A.  K.  H.,  D.D.). 

TWENTY -FIVE  YEARS  OF  ST. 
ANDREWS,  1 865- 1 890.  2  vols.  8vo. 
Vol.  I.  8vo.  I2S.     Vol.  II.  15s. 

AUTUMN  HOLIDAYS  OF  A  COUN- 
TRY PARSON.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6<f. 

CHANGED  ASPECTS  OF  UN- 
CHANGED TRUTHS.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6(f. 

COMMONPLACE  PHILOSOPHER. 

Cr.   8vo.  3s.  6d. 

COUNSEL  AND  COMFORT  FROM  A 
CITY  PULPIT.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

CRITICAL  ESSAYS  OF  A  COUNTRY 
PARSON.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

EAST  COAST  DAYS  AND  MEMO- 
RIES.    Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6cl. 

GRAVER  THOUGHTS  OF  A  COUN- 
TRY PARSON.  Three  Series.  Cr. 
Svo.   3s.  6(/.  each. 

LANDSCAPES,  CHURCHES  AND 
MORALITIES.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 


BOYD  (A.  K.  H.,  D.D.).~co,itiuucd. 

LEISURE  HOURS  IN  TOWN.  Cr. 
Svo.  3s.  6d. 

LESSONS  OF  MIDDLE  AGE.  Cr.  Svo. 
3s.  6d. 

OUR  LITTLE  LIFE.  Two  Series.  Cr. 
Svo.  3s.  6d.  each. 

OUR  HOMELY  COMEDY  :  AND  TRA- 
GEDY.    Cr.8vo.3s.6d. 

PRESENT  DAY  THOUGHTS.  Cr. 
Svo.  3s.  6d. 

RECREATIONS  OF  A  COUNTRY 
PARSON.  Three  Series.  Cr.  Svo. 
3s.  6d.  each.  Also  ist  series.  Popular 
Edition.     Svo.  6d. 

SEASIDE  MUSINGS.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6^/. 

SUNDAY  AFTERNOONS  IN  THE 
PARISH  CHURCH  OF  A  SCOTTISH 
UNIVERSITY  CITY.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

'TO  MEET  THE  DAY'  through  the 
Christian  Year:  being  a  Text  of  Scripture, 
with  an  Original  Meditation  and  a  Short 
Selection  in  Verse  for  Every  Day.  Cr. 
Svo.  4s.  6rf. 

BRASSEY  (Lady). 
A     VOYAGE     IN    THE     'SUNBEAM,' 
OUR  HOME  ON  THE   OCEAN  FOR 
ELEVEN  MONTHS. 

Library   Edition.      With    8   Maps    and 

Charts,  and  118  Illustrations.  Svo.  21s. 

Cabinet   Edition.      With   Map   and   66 

Illustrations.     Cr.   Svo.  75.  6d. 
'  Silver    Library '     Edition.       With    66 

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 
Popular  Edition.    With  60  Illustrations. 

4to.  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth. 
School  Edition.     With  37  Illustrations. 
Fcp.   2S.   cloth,   or    3s.  white    parch- 
ment. 
SUNSHINE    AND    STORM    IN    THE 
EAST. 

Librar}'  Edition.      With  2   Maps   and 

114  Illustrations.     Svo.   21s. 
Cabinet  Edition.      With  2    Maps   and 

114  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  7s.  6d. 
Popular    Edition.      With   103   Illustra- 
tions.    4to.  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth. 
IN    THE    TRADES,    THE     TROPICS, 
AND  THE  'ROARING  FORTIES'. 
Cabinet  Edition.     With  Map   and  220 

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.   7s.  6d. 
Popular    Edition.      With    183    Illustra- 
tions.    4to.  6d.  sewed,   is.   cloth. 
THE  LAST  VOYAGE  TO  INDIA  AND 
AUSTRALIA  IN  THE  'SUNBEAM'. 
With  Charts  and  Maps,  and  40  Illustra- 
tions   in    Monotone    (20    full-page),    and 
nearly  200  Illustrations  in  the  Text  from 
Drawings  by  R.  T.  Pritchett.     Svo.  21s. 
[Cojitinued  011  next  page. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  .i  CO. 


BRASSEY  {La.dj)— continued. 

THREE  VOYAGES  IN  THE  'SUN- 
BEAM'. Popular  Edition.  With  346 
Illustrations.     4to.  25.  6rf. 

BRAY  (Charles). 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  NECESSITY: 
or,  Law  in  Mind  as  in  Matter.    Cr.  8vo.  55. 

BRENDA. 

OLD  ENGLAND'S  STORY  IN  LITTLE 

WORDS  FOR  LITTLE  CHILDREN. 

With  29  Illustrations.     Imp.  i6mo.  35.  6d. 
WITHOUT  A  REFERENCE.     A  Story. 

Cr.  8vo.  35.  6ci. 

BRIGHT  (Rev.  J.  Franck,   D.D.),  Master 
of  University  College,  Oxford. 
A  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.     4  vols. 
Cr.  8vo. 

Period  I. — Mediaeval   Monarchy  :    The 
Departure  of  the  Romans  to  Richard 
III.     From  A.D.  449  to  1485.     4s.  6d. 
Period  II. — Personal  Monarchy :  Henry 
VII.   to   James    II.      From    1485    to 
16S8.     5s. 
Period  III. — Constitutional  Monarchy: 
William  and   Mary  to  William   IV. 
From   1689  to  1837.     js.  6d. 
Period  IV. — The  Growth  of  Democracy : 
Victoria.     From  1837  to  1880.     65. 

BUCKLE  (Henry  Thomas). 

HISTORY  OF  CIVILISATION  IN 
ENGLAND  AND  FRANCE,  SPAIN 
AND  SCOTLAND.   3  vols.    Cr.  8vo.  24s. 

BULL  (Thomas). 
HINTS  TO  MOTHERS  ON  THE  MAN- 
AGEMENT OF  THEIR  HEALTH 
DURING  THE  PERIOD  OF  PREG- 
NANCY. Fcp.  8vo.  15.  6d. 
THE  MATERNAL  MANAGEMENT 
OF  CHILDREN  IN  HEALTH  AND 
DISEASE.     Fcp.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

BUTLER  (Samuel). 

Op.  I.  EREWHON.     Cr.  8vo.  5s. 

Op.  2.  THE    FAIR    HAVEN.      A  Work 

in  defence  of  the  Miraculous  Element  in 

our  Lord's  Ministry.     Cr.  8vo.  75.  6d. 
Op.  3.  LIFE    AND   HABIT.      An  Essay 

after   a   Completer   View    of    Evolution. 

Cr.  8vo.  js.  6d. 
op.  4.  EVOLUTION,  OLD  AND  NEW. 

Cr.  8vo.  I05.  6d. 
Op.  5.   UNCONSCIOUS  MEMORY.     Cr. 

8vo.  75.  6d. 
Op.  6.  ALPS  AND  SANCTUARIES  OF 

PIEDMONT  AND  CANTON  TICINO. 

Illustrated.     Pott  410.  los.  6d. 
op.  7.  SELECTIONS   FROM   OPS.  1-6. 

With  Remarks  on  Mr.  Romanes'  '  Mental 

Evolution  in  Animals  '.     Cr.  8vo.  ys.  6d. 


BUTLER  {Samuel)— continued. 

Op.  8.  LUCK,  OR  CUNNING,  AS  THE 

MAIN  MEANS  OF  ORGANIC  MODI- 

FICA  TION  ?     Cr.  8vo.  75.  6d. 
op.  g.  EX    VOTO.      An    Account   ot    the 

Sacro  Monte  or  New  Jerusalem  at  Varallo- 

Sesia.     los.  6d. 
HOLBEIN'S  '  LA  DANSE  '.     A  Note  on 

a  Drawing  called  '  La  Danse  '.     35. 

CARLYLE  (Thomas). 

LAST  WORDS  OF  THOMAS  CAR- 
L  YLE  —  Wotton  Reinfred  —  Excursion 
(Futile  Enough)  to  Paris — Letters  to 
Varnhagen  von  Ense,  &c.  Cr.  8vo. 
6s.  6d.  net. 

THOMAS  CARLYLE:  a  History  of  his 
Life.  By  J.  A.  Froude.  1795-1835.  2 
vols.  Cr.  8vo.  ys.  1834-1881.  2  vols. 
Cr.  8vo.  75. 

CHESNEY  (Lieut. -General  Sir  George). 

INDIAN  POLITY:  a  View  of  the  System 
of  Administration  in  India.  New  Edition, 
Revised  and  Enlarged. 

CHETWYND  (Sir  George,  Bart). 

RACING  REMINISCENCES  AND 
EXPERIENCES  OF  THE  TURF.  2 
vols.   8vo.   2Ii-. 

CHILD  (Gilbert  W.). 

CHURCH  AND  STATE  UNDER  THE 
TUDORS.     8vo.  155. 

CHILTON  (E.). 

THE  HISTORY  OF  A  FAILURE,  and 
other  Tales.     Fcp.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

CHISHOLM  (G.  G.). 

HANDBOOK  OF  COMMERCIAL  GEO- 
GRAPHY.   With  29  Maps.    8vo.  105.  net. 

CLERKE  (Agnes  M.). 

FAMILIAR  STUDIES  IN  HOMER. 
Crown  8vo.  ys.  6d. 

CLODD  (Edward). 

THE  STORY  OF  CREATION :  a  Plain 
Account  of  Evolution.  With  77  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

CLUTTERBUCK  (W.  J.). 

ABOUT  CEYLON  AND  BORNEO : 
being  an  Account  of  Two  Visits  to 
Ceylon,  one  to  Borneo,  and  How  we 
Fell  Out  on  our  Homeward  Journey 
With  47  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6c?- 

COLENSO    (J.  W.,    D.D.,  late  Bishop  of 
Natal). 
THE      PENTATEUCH     AND      BOOK 
OF     JOSHUA     CRITICALLY     EX- 
AMINED.    Cr.  Svo.  65. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


COMYN   (L.   N.). 

ATHERSTONE  PRIORY:  a  Tale.  Cr. 
8vo.   2s.  6d. 

CONINGTON  (John). 

THE  MNEID  OF  VIRGIL.     Translated 

into  English  Verse.      Cr.  8vo.  65. 
THE  POEMS  OF  VIRGIL.     Translated 

into  English  Prose.     Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

COPLESTON   (Reginald  Stephen,  D.D., 
Bishop  of  Colombo). 
BUDDHISM,  PRIMITIVE  AND  PRE- 
SENT,   IN     MAG  AD  HA     AND     IN 
CEYLON.     8vo.    16s. 

COX  (The  Rev.  Sir  G.  W.,  Bart.,  M.A.). 
A  GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  GREECE, 
from  the  Earliest  Period  to  the  Death  of 
Alexander  the  Great  ;  with  a  sketch  of 
the  subsequent  History  to  the  Present 
Time.  With  11  Maps  and  Plans.  Cr. 
8vo.  7s.  61L 

CRAKE  (Rev.  A.  D.). 

EDIVY  THE  FAIR  :  or,  The  First  Chro- 
nicle of  ^scendune.     Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

ALFGAR  THE  DANE  :  or,  the  Second 
Chronicle  of  ^scendune.     Cr.  8vo.  2s.  dd. 

THE  RIVAL  HEIRS  :  being  the  Third 
and  Last  Chronicle  of  .lEscendune.  Cr. 
8vo.  25.  6d. 

THE  HOUSE  OF  WALDERXE.  A 
Tale  of  the  Cloister  and  the  Forest  in 
the  Days  of  the  Barons'  Wars.  Cr.  Svo. 
25.  dd. 

BRIAN  FITZ-COUNT.  A  Story  of  Wal- 
lingford  Castle  and  Dorchester  Abbey. 
Cr.  8vo.  25.  bd. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  CHURCH  UNDER 
THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE,  A.D.  30-476. 
Crown  8vo.  75.  6rf. 

CREIGHTON  (Mandell,  D.D.,  LL.D., 
Bishop  of  Peterborough). 
HISTORY  OF  THE  PAPACY  6URING 
THE  REFORMATION.  8vo.  Vols.  I. 
and  II.,  1378-1464,  325.;  Vols.  III.  and 
IV.,  1464-1518,  245. 

CROZIER  (John  Beattie,  M.D.). 

CIVILISATION  AND  PROGRESS. 
Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  and 
with  New  Preface.  More  fully  explaining 
the  nature  of  the  New  Organon  used  in 
the  solution  of  its  problems.     Svo.  145. 

CRUMP  (A.). 
A  SHORT  ENQUIRY  INTO  THE  FOR- 
MATION OF  POLITICAL  OPINION,  \ 
from  the  reign  of  the  Great  Families  to  i 
the  Advent  of  Democracy.     Svo.  75.  6^/.      i 


CRUMP  (A.)— continued. 

AN  INVESTIGATION  INTO  THE 
CAUSES  OF  THE  GREAT  FALL 
IN  PRICES  which  took  place  coinci- 
dently  with  the  Demonetisation  of  Silver 
by  Germany.     Svo.  65. 

CURZON  (The  Hon.  George  N.,  M.P., 
late  Fellov.'  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford). 
PERSIA  AND  THE  PERSIAN  QUES- 
TION. With  9  Maps,  96  Illustrations. 
Appendices,  and  an  Index.  2  vols.  Svo. 
425. 

DANTE. 

LA  COMMEDIA  DI  DANTE.  A  New 
Text,  carefully  Revised  with  the  aid  of 
the  most  recent  Editions  and  Collations. 
Sm.  Svo.  65. 

DAVIDSON  (W.  L.). 

THE  LOGIC  OF  DEFINITION  EX- 
PLAINED AND  APPLIED.  Cr.  Svo. 
65. 

LEADING  AND  IMPORTANT  ENG- 
LISH WORDS  EXPLAINED  AND 
EXEMPLIFIED.     Fcp.  Svo.  35.  6d. 

DEAD  SHOT  (THE) :  or,  Sportsman's  Com- 
plete Guide.  Being  a  Treatise  on  the 
Use  of  the  Gun,  with  Rudimentary  and 
Finishing  Lessons  on  the  Art  of  Shooting 
Game  of  all  kinds,  also  Game  Driving, 
Wild-Fowl  and  Pigeon  Shooting,  Dog 
Breaking,  &c.  By  Marksman.  Cr.  Svo. 
1 05.  6d. 

DELAND     (Margaret,    Author    of    'John 
Ward  •). 
THE   STORY  OF  A   CHILD.      Cr.  Svo. 

DE  LA  SAUSSAYE  (Professor  Chan- 
tepie). 
A  MANUAL  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF 
RELIGION.  Translated  by  Mrs.  Col- 
YER  Fergusson  {nee  Max  Mljller).  Cr. 
Svo.  125.  6d. 

DE  SALIS  (Mrs.). 

CAKES    AND    CONFECTIONS    2    LA 

MODE.      Fcp.  Svo.   15.  6d. 
DRESSED    GAME  AND  POULTRY  ^ 

LA  MODE.     Fcp.  Svo.  15.  6d. 
DRESSED  VEGETABLES  A  LA  MODE. 

Fcp.  Svo.  15.  6d. 
DRINKS  A  LA  MODE.     Fcp.  Svo.  15.  6d. 
ENTREES    2    LA    MODE.      Fcp.    Svo. 

15.   6d. 
FLORAL  DECORATIONS.    Suggestions 

and  Descriptions.     Fcp.  Svo.  15.  6d. 

{^Continued  on  next  page 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  d  CO. 


DE  SALIS  {lilts.)— continued . 

NEW-LAID   EGGS:    Hints  for  Amateur 

Poultry  Rearers.     Fcp.  8vo.   is.  6d. 
OYSTERS  A  LA  MODE.   Fcp.  8vo.  is.6d. 
PUDDINGS     AND     PASTRY     ^     LA 

MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.  is.  6d. 
SAVOURIES  A  LA  MODE.      Fcp.  8vo. 

IS.  6d. 
SOUPS   AND   DRESSED   FISH  A  LA 

MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.  is.  6d. 
SWEETS   AND    SUPPER   DISHES   ^ 

LA   MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.  is.  6d. 
TEMPTING    DISHES    FOR     SMALL 

INCOMES.     Fcp.  8vo.  is.  6d. 
WRINKLES     AND     NOTIONS     FOR 

EVERY     HOUSEHOLD.        Cr.      8vo. 

IS.  6d. 

DE  TOCQUEVILLE  (Alexis). 
DEMOCRACY  IN   AMERICA.      2  vols. 
Cr.  8vo.  i6s. 

DOROTHY  WALLIS  :  an  Autobiography. 
With  Preface  by  Walter  Bes.\nt.  Cr. 
8vo.  6s. 

DOUGALL  (L.). 

BEGGARS  ALL:  a  Novel.  Cr.  8vo. 
is.  6d. 

DOWELL  (Stephen). 

.1  HISTORY  OF  TAXATION  AND 
TAXES  IN  ENGLAND,  from  the  Ear- 
liest Times  to  the  Year  1885.  (4  vols. 
8vo.)  Vols.  I.  and  II.  The  History  of 
Taxation,  21s.  Vols.  III.  and  IV.  The 
History  of  Taxes,   21s. 

DOYLE  (A.  Conan). 

MICAH  CLARKE.  A  Tale  of  Monmouth's 
Rebellion.  With  Frontispiece  and  Vig- 
nette.    Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  POLESTAR  : 
and  other  Tales.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

DUBLIN  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
SERIES  (THE)  :  a  Series  of  Works 
undertaken  by  the  Provost  and  Senior 
Fellows  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin. 

CODEX RESCRIPTUS  DUBLINENSIS 
OF  ST.  MAT  1  HEW.  By  T.  K.  Abbott. 
4to.  21S. 

EVANGELIORUM  VERSIO  ANTE- 
HIERONYMIANA  EX  CODICE 
USSERIANO  (DUBLINENSI).  By 
T.  K.  Abbott.     2  vols.     Cr.  8vo.  21s. 

SHORT  NOTES  ON  ST.  PAUL'S 
EPISTLES  TO  THE  ROMANS, 
CORINTHIANS,  GALATIANS,EPH- 
ESIANS  AND  PHILIPPIANS.  By 
T.  K.  Abbott.     Fcp.  8vo.  4s. 


DUBLIN        UNIVERSITY        PRESS 
SERIES  {JllR)~continued. 
GREEK  GEOMETRY  FROM  THALES 
TO  EUCLID.     ByG.  J.Allman.     8vo. 
los.  6rf. 
THEORY  OF  EQUATIONS.     By  W.  S. 
BuRNSiDE    and    A.    W.    Panton.      8vo. 
I2S.  6d. 
SEQUEL  TO  EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 

By  John  Casey.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
ANALYTICAL   GEOMETRY  OF   THE 
CONIC  SECTIONS.     By  John  Casey. 
Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
EUMENIDES  OF  MSCHYLUS.     With 
Metrical  English  Translation.     By  J.  F. 
Davies.     8vo.  7s. 
DUBLIN       TRANSLATIONS      INTO 
GREEK      AND      LATIN      VERSE. 
Edited  by  R.  Y.  Tyrrell.     8vo.  6s. 
LIFE  OF  SIR  WILLIAM  HAMILTON. 

By  R.  P.  Graves.     3  vols.     15s.  each. 
ADDENDUM   TO    THE  LIFE  OF  SIR 
WILLIAM     ROWAN      HAMILTON, 
LL.D.,  D.C.L.     8vo.  6d.  sewed. 
PARABOLA,  ELLIPSE  AND  HYPER- 
BOLA.   By  R.  W.  Griffin.    Cr.  8vo.  6s. 
MEDICAL  LANGUAGE  OF  ST.  LUKE. 

By  W.  K.  HoBART.     8vo.  i6s. 
ESSAYS   IN  POLITICAL  ECONOMY. 

By  T.  E.  Cliffe  Leslie.     8vo.  los.  6d. 
ZOOLOGY    AND    MORPHOLOGY    OF 
VERTEBRATA.      By  A.   Macalister. 
8vo.  ios.  6d. 
MATHEMATICAL        AND        OTHER 
TRACTS.       By    James    MacCullagh. 
8vo.   15s. 
PARMENIDES  OF  PLATO,  Text,  with 
Introduction,     Analysis,     &c.        By     1". 
Maguire.     8vo.  7s.  6d. 
INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC.     By  W. 

H.  S.  Monck.     Cr.  8vo.  5s. 
EXAMPLES     ON     THE     ANALYTIC 
GEOMETRY    OF    PLANE    CONICS. 
By  R.  A.  Roberts.     Cr.  8vo.  5s. 
CORRESPONDENCE     WITH     CARO- 
LINE   BOWLES.       By    R.    Southev. 
Edited  by  E.  Dowden.     8vo.  14s. 
HISTORY  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF 
DUBLIN,  from   its  Foundation    to   the 
End  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.     By  J. 
W.  Stubbs.     8vo.  I2S.  6d. 
THE  jENEID  of  F/i?G/L,  freely  trans- 
lated into  English  Blank  Verse.      By  ^^'. 
J.  Thornhill.     Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6(f. 
CICERO'S  CORRESPONDENCE.    By  R. 
Y.Tyrrell.  Vo1s.I.,II.,IIL  8vo.eachi2s. 
THE     ACHARNIANS      OF     ARISTO- 
PHANES, translated  into  English  Verse. 
By  R.  Y.  Tyrrell.     Cr.  8vo.  is. 

[Confiniifd  on  next  page. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


DUBLIN        UNIVERSITY        PRESS 

SERIES  (J}:i'E)—contimicd. 
GOETHE'S     FAUST,     Translation     and 

Notes.     By  T.  E.  Webb.     8vo.  12s.  6d. 
THE   VEIL  OF  ISIS :  a  Series  of  Essays 

on    Idealism.      By   T.    E.  Webb.      8vo. 

I05.  6d. 
THE    GROWTH   OF   THE    HOMERIC 

POEMS.     By  G.  Wilkin.     Svo.  6s. 


EPOCHS    OF   ANCIENT    HISTORY. 

Edited    by    the     Rev.    Sir    G.    W.    Cox, 

Bart.,    M.A.,    and    by   C.    Sankey,    M.A. 

Fcp.  Svo.  with  Maps,  2s.  6d.  each. 
The  Athenian  Empire  from  the  Flight  of 

Xerxes  to  the  Fall  of  Athens.     By  the 

Rev.  Sir  G.  W.  Cox,  Bart.,  M.A.     With 

5  Maps. 
Rome  to  its  Capture  by  the  Gauls.     By 

WiLHELM  Ihne.     With  a  Map. 
The  Roman  Triumvirates.     By  the  Very 

Rev.  Charles  Merivale,  D.D.,  Dean  of 

Ely.     With  a  Map. 
The  Spartan  and  Theban  Supremacies. 

By  Charles  Sankey,  M.A.  With  5  Maps. 
Rome  and  Carthage,  the  Punic  Wars. 

By  R.  BoswoRTH  Smith,  M.A.     With  9 

Maps  and  Plans. 
The  Gracchi,  Marius,  and  Sulla.     By  A. 

H.  Beesly,  M.A.     With  2  Maps. 
The  Early  Roman   Empire.      From  the 

Assassination    of    Julius    Cssar    to    the 

Assassination  of  Domitian.     By  the  Rev. 

W.     Wolfe     Capes,     M.A.        With     2 

Maps. 
The     Roman    Empire    of    the    Second 

Century,  or  the  Age  of  the  Antonines. 

By  the    Rev.  W^.   Wolfe    Capes,   M.A. 

With  2   Maps. 
The  Greeks  and  the  Persians.  By  the  Rev. 

Sir    G.   W.    Cox,    Bart.,    M.A.     With    4 

Maps. 
The  Rise  of  the  Macedonian  Empire.    By 

Arthur  M.  Curteis,  M.A.  With  8  Maps. 


EPOCHS    OF    MODERN    HISTORY. 

Edited  by  C.  Colbeck,   M.A.     Fcp.  Svo. 

with  Maps,  2s.  6d.  each. 
The  Beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages.     By 

the  Very  Rev.  Richard  William  Church, 

M.A.,  &c.,  late  Dean  of  St.  Paul's.    With 

3  Maps. 
The  Normans  in  Europe.      By  the  Rev. 

A.  H.  Johnson,  M.A.     With  3  Maps. 
The  Crusades.     By  the  Rev.   Sir   G.  W. 

Cox,  Bart.,  M.A.     With  a  Map. 
The  Early  Plantagenets.     By  the  Right 

Rev.  W.  Stubbs,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Oxford. 

With  2  Maps. 


EPOCHS   OF  MODERN   HISTORY— 

coil  tinned. 
Edward    the   Third.      By   the   Rev.    W. 

Warburton,  M.A.     With  3  Maps  and  3 

Genealogical  Tables. 
The  Houses  of  Lancaster  and  York ;  with 

the  Conquest  and  Loss  of  France.      By 

James  Gairdner.     With  5  Maps. 
The  Early  Tudors.      By  the  Rev.   C.  E. 

Moberly,  M.A. 
The  Era  of  the  Protestant  Revolution. 

By  F.  Seebohm.     With  4  Maps  and  12 

Diagrams. 
The  Age  of  Elizabeth.      By  the   Right 

Rev.   M.  Creighton,   LL.D.,  Bishop  of 

Peterborough.       With    5    Maps    and    4 

Genealogical  Tables. 
The  First  Two  Stuarts  and  the  Puritan 

Revolution    (1603-1660).      By    Samuel 

Rawson  Gardiner.     With  4  Maps. 
The    English    Restoration    and     Louis 

XIV.  (164S-1678).     By  Osmund  Airy. 
The  Fall  of  the  Stuarts ;   and  Western 

Europe  from  1678  to  1697.     By  the  Rev. 

Edward    Hale,    M.A.      With  11    Maps 

and  Plans. 
The  Age  of  Anne.      By   E.   E.  Morris, 

M.A.     With  7  Maps  and  Plans. 
The  Thirty  Years'  War,  1618-1648.     By 

Samuel  Rawson  Gardiner.  With  a  Map. 
The     Early    Hanoverians.       By    E.    E. 

Morris,  M.A.     With  9  Maps  and  Plans. 
Frederick    the    Great    and    the    Seven 

Years'   War.       By   F.    W.    Longman. 

W'ith  2  Maps. 
The  War  of  American  Independence,  1 775- 

1783.     ByJ.  M.  Ludlow.     With4Maps. 
The  French  Revolution,   1789-1795.     By 

Mrs.  S.  R.  Gardiner.     With  7  Maps. 
The   Epoch  of  Reform,   1830- 1850.      By 

Justin  McCarthy,  M.P. 


EPOCHS    OF    CHURCH    HISTORY. 

Edited  by  the  Right  Rev.  Mandell 
Creighton,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Peter- 
borough.    Fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6d.  each. 

The    English   Church  in   other   Lands. 
By  the  Rev.  H.   W.  Tucker. 

The  History  of  the  Reformation  in  Eng- 
land.    By  the  Rev.  George  G.  Perry. 

A  History  of  the  University  of  Oxford. 
By  the  Hon.  G.  C.  Brodrick. 

A   History   of  the    University  of  Cam- 
bridge.    By  J.  Bass  Mullinger,  M.A. 

The  Church  of  the  Early  Fathers.     By 
A.  Plummer,  D.D. 

The   Church   and    the   Roman   Empire. 
By  the  Rev.  A.  Carr. 

[Cont'unicd  on  next  page. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,   GREEN,  &  CO. 


EPOCHS   OF  CHURCH  HISTORY— 

continued. 

The  Church  and  the  Puritans  (1570-1660). 
By  H.  Offlky  Wakeman,  M.A. 

The  Evangelical  Revival  in  the  Eigh- 
teenth Century.  By  the  Rev.  J.  H. 
Overton. 

The  Church  and  the  Eastern  Empire' 
By  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Tozer. 

Hildebrand  and  his  Times.  By  the  Rev. 
W.  R.  W.  Stephens. 

The  English  Church  in  the  Middle  Ages. 
By  the  Rev.  W.  Hunt,  M.A. 

The  Popes  and  the  Hohenstaufen.  By 
Ugo  Balzani. 

The  Arian  Controversy.  By  H.  M. 
Gwatkin,  M.A. 

The  Cotxnter-Reformation.  By  A.  W. 
Ward. 

Wycliffe  and  Early  Movements  of  Re- 
form.    By  Reginald  L.  Poole,  M.A. 

EPOCHS  OF  AMERICAN  HISTORY. 

Edited  by  Dr.  Albert  Bushnell  Hart, 
Assistant  Professor  of  History  in  Harvard 
College,  U.S.A.     Fcp.  8vo.  35.  6rf.  each. 

The  Colonies  (1492-1750).  By  Reuben 
Gold  Thwaites,  Secretary  of  the  State 
Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin. 

Formation  of  the  Union  (1750-1829).  By 
ASSERT  Bushnell  Hart,  A.B.,  Ph.D., 
the  Editor  of  the  Series.     With  5  Maps. 

Division  and  Re-Union  (1829-1889).  By 
WooDROw  Wilson,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Jurisprudence  in  Princeton 
College.     With  5  Maps.     Fcp.  8vo. 

EPOCH  MAPS,  Illustrating  American  His- 
tory. By  Albert  Bushnell  Hart, 
Ph.D.,  Assistant  Professor  of  History  in 
Harvard  College.  14  Maps.  Oblong 
4to.  2s.  6d. 

EPOCHS   OF   ENGLISH    HISTORY. 

Complete  in  One  Volume,  with  27  Tables 
and  Pedigrees,  and  23  Maps.     Fcp.  8vo. 

*^*  For  details  of  Parts  sec  Longmans  &  Co.'s 
Catalogue  of  School  Books. 

EWALD  (Heinrich). 

THE     ANTIQUITIES     OF     ISRAEL. 

Translated  from    the  German  by  H.   S. 

Solly,  M.A.     8vo.   12s.  6d. 
THE  HISTORY  OF   ISRAEL.      Trans- 
lated   from    the    German.       8    vols.    8vo. 

Vols.  I.  and  II.  24s.     Vols.  III.  and  IV. 

215.     Vol.  V.   185.     Vol.  VI.   i6s.      Vol. 

VII.  215.     Vol.  VIII.,   with  Index  to  the 

Complete  Work,  185. 


FALKENER  (Edward). 

GAMES,  ANCIENT  AND  ORIENTAL, 
AND  HOW  TO  PLAY  THEM.  Being 
the  Games  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,  the 
Hiera  Gramme  of  the  Greeks,  the  Ludus 
Latrunculorum  of  the  Romans,  and  the 
Oriental  Games  of  Chess,  Draughts, 
Backgammon  and  Magic  Squares.  With 
numerous    Photographs,    Diagrams,    &c. 


FARNELL  (George  S.,  M.A.). 

GREEK  LYRIC  POETRY:  a  Complete 
Collection  of  the  Surviving  Passages  from 
the  Greek  Song- Writers.  Arranged  with 
Prefatory  Articles,  Introductory  Matter 
and  Commentary.  V/ith  5  Plates.  8vo. 
165. 

FARRAR  (Archdeacon). 

DARKNESS  AND  DAWN:  or,  Scenes 
in  the  Days  of  Nero.  An  Historic  Tale. 
Cr.  8vo.  7s.  bd. 

LANGUAGE  AND  LANGUAGES.  A 
Revised  Edition  of  Chapters  on  Language 
and  Families  of  Speech.     Cr.  8vo.  65. 

FITZPATRICK    (W.    J.,    F.S.A.,  Author 
of  '  Correspondence  of  Daniel  O'Connell '). 
SECRET     SERVICE     UNDER     PITT. 
8vo.    145. 

FITZWYGRAM  (Major-General  Sir  F., 

Bart.). 
HORSES    AND    STABLES.      V/ith    19 
pages  of  Illustrations.     8vo.  55. 

FORD  (Horace). 

THE  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  OF 
ARCHERY.  New  Edition,  thoroughly 
Revised  and  Re-written  by  W.  Butt, 
M.A.  With  a  Preface  by  C.  J.  Longman, 
M.A.,  F.S.A.     8vo.  145. 

FOUARD  (Abbe  Constant). 

THE  CHRIST  THE  SON  OF  GOD: 
a  Life  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.  With  an  Introduction  by  Cardinal 
Manning.     2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.  145. 

ST.  PETER  AND  THE  FIRST  YEARS 
OF  CHRISTIANITY.  Translated  from 
the  Second  Edition,  with  the  Author's 
sanction,  by  George  F.  X.  Griffith. 
With  an  Introduction  by  Cardinal  Gib- 
bons.    Cr.  Svo.  95. 

FOX  (Charles  James). 

THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  CHARLES 
JAMES  FOX.  By  the  Right  Hon.  Sir 
G.  O.  Trevelyan,  Bart. 

Library  Edition.     Svo.  185. 
Cabinet  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  65. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


FRANCIS  (Francis). 
A  BOOK  ON  ANGLING  :  or,  Treatise 
on  the  Art  of  Fishing  in  every  branch  ; 
including  full  Illustrated  List  of  Salmon 
Flies.  With  Portrait  and  Coloured  Plates. 
Cr.  8vo.  155. 

FREEMAN  (Edward  A.). 

THE  HISTORICAL  GEOGRAPHY  OF 
EUROPE.  With  65  Maps.  2  vols.  8vo. 
3 IS.  6^/. 

FROUDE  (James  A.,    Regius  Professor  of 
Modern    History    in    the    University    of 

Oxford). 
THE    HISTORY  OF   ENGLAND,  from 

the  Fall  of  Wolsey  to  the  Defeat  of  the 
Spanish    Armada.       12    vols.      Cr.    8vo. 

^s.  6rf.  each. 
THE  DIVORCE   OF  CATHERINE  OF 

ARAGON  :    the    Story   as   told    by   the 

Imperial    Ambassadors    resident    at    the 

Court  of  Henry  VIII.    In  itsiim  Laicoriiiii. 

8vo.  165. 
THE     SPANISH     STORY     OF     THE 

ARMADA,  and  other  Essays,  Historical 

and  Descriptive.     Cr.  8vo.  65. 
SHORT   STUDIES    ON   GREAT  SUB- 

yECTS.     Cabinet  Edition.     4  vols.     Cr. 

8vo.  24s.      Cheap  Edition.     4  vols.     Cr. 

8vo.  35.  6d.  each. 
CMSAR  :  a  Sketch.     Cr.  8vo.  35.  6d. 
THE     ENGLISH     IN     IRELAND    IN 

THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.     3 

vols.     Cr.  8vo.   i8s. 
OCEANA  :  or,  England  and  her  Colonies.  ' 

With  9  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.  2s.  boards, 

25.  6d.  cloth. 
THE     ENGLISH     IN     THE      WEST 

INDIES  :  or,  the  Bow  of  Ulysses.     With 

9  Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo.  2s.  boards,  25.  6d. 

cloth.  . 

THE    TWO    CHIEFS    OF   DUNBOY :  \ 

an   Irish  Romance  of  the   Last  Century. 

Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
THOMAS    CARLYLE,  a  History  of  his 

Life.     1795  to  1835.     2  vols.     Cr.  8vo.  75. 

1834  to  1881.     2  vols.     Cr.  8vo.  js.  '< 

GALLWEY  (Sir  Ralph  Payne-,   Bart.). 
LETTERS    TO    YOUNG    SHOOTERS. 
(First  Series.)     On   the  Choice  and  Use 
of  a  Gun.     With  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.  1 
75.  6d. 
LETTERS    TO    YOUNG    SHOOTERS. 
(Second    Series.)       On    the    Production, 
Preservation  and  Killing  of  Game.     With 
Directions  in  Shooting  Wood-pigeons  and 
Breaking-in  Retrievers.     With  a  Portrait 
of  the  Author,  and  103  Illustrations.     Cr. 
8vo.  i2s.  bd. 


GARDINER  (Samuel  Rawson,  Fellow  of 
All  Souls  College,  Oxford). 
HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the 
Accession  of  James  I.  to  the  Outbreak  of 
the  Civil  War,  1603-1642.  10  vols.  Cr. 
8vo.  price  6s.  each. 
THE  STUDENTS  HISTORY  OF 
ENGLAND.  Complete  in  i  vol.  With 
378  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.  12s. 

Vol.   I.  B.C.  55 — A.D.  1509.     With   173 

Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.  4s. 
Vol.   II.   1509-1689.     With  96  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  8vo.  4s. 
Vol.  III.  1689-1885.     With  109  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  8vo.  4s. 
A     SCHOOL     ATLAS     OF    ENGLISH 
HISTORY.       With    66    Maps    and    22 
Plans  of  Battles,  &c.     Fcp.  410.  5s. 

GOETHE. 

FAUST.  A  New  Translation  chiefly  in 
Blank  Verse  ;  with  Introduction  and 
Notes.  By  James  Adev  Birds.  Cr. 
8vo.  6s. 

FAUST.  The  Second  Part.  A  New 
Translation  in  Verse.  By  James  Adev 
Birds.     Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

GREEN  (Thomas  Hill). 

THE     WORKS     OF    THOMAS     HILL 
1  GREEN.     Edited  by  R.  L.  Nettleship. 

3  vols.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  Philosophical 
Works.  8vo.  i6s.  each.  Vol.  III.  Mis- 
cellanies. With  Index  to  the  three 
Volumes  and  Memoir.  8vo.  12s. 
THE  WITNESS  OF  GOD  A ND  FAITH : 
Two  Lay  Sermons.     Fcp.  8vo.  2s. 

GREVILLE  (C.  C.  F.). 

A  JOURNAL  OF  THE  REIGNS  OF 
KING  GEORGE  IV.,  KING  WILLIAM 
IV.  AND  QUEEN  VICTORIA.  8  vols. 
Cr.  8vo.  6s.  each. 

GWILT  (Joseph,  F.S.A.). 
^A'     ENCYCLOPEDIA     OF     ARCHI- 
TECTURE.    Illustrated  with  more  than 
1700  Engravings  on  Wood.     8vo.  52s.  6d. 

HAGGARD  (Ella). 
LIFE    AND    ITS   AUTHOR:    an   Essay 
in  Verse.     With  a  Memoir  by  H.  Rider 
Haggard,  and  Portrait.     Fcp.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

HAGGARD  (H.  Rider). 

SHE.  With  32  Illustrations  by  M.  Greif- 
fenhagen  and  C.  H.  M.  Kerr.  Cr.  8vo. 
3s.  6d. 

ALLAN  QUATERMAIN.  With  31  Illus- 
trations by  C.  H.  M.  Kerr.  Cr.  8vo. 
3S.  6d. 

MAIWA'S  REVENGE:  or,  The  War  of 
the  Little  Hand.  Cr.  8vo.  is.  boards, 
IS.  6d.  cloth. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &    CO. 


HAGGARD  (H.  -R^A^x)— continued. 

COLONEL  QUARITCH,  V.C.  A  Novel. 
Cr.  8vo.  35.  6(7. 

CLEOPATRA.  With  29  Full-page  Illus- 
trations by  M.  Greiffenhagen  and  R. 
Caton  Woodville.     Cr.  8vo.  35.  6d. 

BEATRICE.     A  Novel.     Cr.  8vo.  35.  6d. 

ERIC  BRIGHTEYES.  With  17  Plates 
and  34  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by 
Lancelot  Speed.     Cr.  Svo.   6s. 

NAD  A  THE  LILY.  With  23  Illustra- 
tions by  C.  H.  M.  Kerr.     Cr.  Svo.  65. 

HAGGARD  (H.  Rider)  and  LANG  (An- 
drew). 
THE   WORLD'S  DESIRE.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS  (J.  O.). 

A  CALENDAR  OF  THE  HALLIWELL- 
PHILLIPPS'  COLLECTION  OF 
SHAKESPEAREAN  RARITIES.  En- 
larged by  Ernest  E.  Baker,  F.S.A. 
Svo.  los.  6d. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  SHAKE- 
SPEARE.  With  numerous  Illustrations 
and   Fac-similes.      2   vols.       Royal   Svo. 

HARRISON  (Jane  E.). 
MYTHS  OF  THE  ODYSSEY  IN  ART 
AND  LITERATURE.     Illustrated  with 
Outline  Drawings.     Svo.  iSs. 

HARRISON  (Mary). 

COOKERY  FOR  BUSY  LIVES  AND 
SMALL  INCOMES.     Fcp.  Svo.  is. 

HARTE  (Bret). 

IN  THE  CARQUINEZ  WOODS.  Fcp. 
Svo.  IS.  boards,  is.  6d.  cloth. 

ON  THE  FRONTIER.     i6mo.  is. 

BY  SHORE  AND  SEDGE.     i6mo.  is. 
*,*  Complete  in  one  Volume.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

HARTWIG  (Dr.). 

THE  SEA  AND  ITS  LIVING  WON- 
DERS. With  12  Plates  and  303  Wood- 
cuts.     Svo.  7s.  net. 

THE  TROPICAL  WORLD.  With  8 
Plates  and  172  Woodcuts.     Svo.  7s.  net. 

THE  POLAR  WORLD.  With  3  Maps,  8 
Plates  and  85  Woodcuts.     Svo.  ys.  net. 

THE  SUBTERRANEAN  WORLD. 
With  3  Maps  and  80  Woodcuts.  Svo. 
7s.  net. 

THE  AERIAL  WORLD.  With  Map,  8 
Plates  and  60  Woodcuts.     Svo.  7s.  net. 

HEROES  OF  THE  POLAR  WORLD. 
19  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  2s. 

WONDERS  OF  THE  TROPICAL 
FORESTS.   40  Illustrations.    Cr.  Svo.  2s. 

WORKERS  UNDER  THE  GROUND. 
29  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  2s. 


HARTWIG  {Dr.)— continued. 

MARVELS    UNDER   OUR   FEET,      iz 

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  2s. 
SEA    MONSTERS   AND    SEA   BIRDS. 

75  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 
DENIZENS     OF     THE     DEEP.       137 

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 
VOLCANOES   AND    EARTHQUAKES. 

30  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 
WILD  ANIMALS  OF  THE  TROPICS. 

66  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

HAVELOCK  (Sir  Henry,   Bart.). 

MEMOIRS  OF  SIR  HENRY  HAVE- 
LOCK, K.C.B.  By  John  Clark  Marsh- 
man.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

HEARN  (W.  Edward). 

THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  ENGLAND: 
its  Structure  and  its  Development.  Svo. 
i6s. 

THE  ARYAN  HOUSEHOLD:  its  Struc- 
ture and  its  Development.  An  Introduc- 
tion to  Comparative  Jurisprudence.  Svo. 
i6s. 

HISTORIC  TOWNS.  Edited  by  E.  A. 
Freeman,  D.C.L.,  and  Rev.  William 
Hunt,  M.A.  With  Maps  and  Plans. 
Cr.   Svo.  3s.   6d.  each. 

BRISTOL.     By  Rev.  W.  Hunt. 

CARLISLE.  By  Mandell  Creighton, 
D.D.,  Bishop  of  Peterborough. 

CINQUE  PORTS.  By  Montagu  Bur- 
rows. 

COLCHESTER.     By  Rev.  E.  L.  Cutts. 

EXETER.     By  E.  A.  Freeman. 

LONDON.     By  Rev.  W.  J.  Loftie. 

OXFORD.     By  Rev.  C.  W.  Boase. 

WINCHESTER.  By  Rev.  G.  W.  Kit- 
chin,  D.D. 

NEW  YORK.    By  Theodore  Roosevelt. 

BOSTON  {U.S.).  By  Henry  Cabot 
Lodge. 

YORK.     By  Rev.  James  Raine. 

HODGSON  (Shadworth  H.). 

TIME  AND  SPACE  :  a  Metaphysical 
Essay.     Svo.    i6s. 

THE  THEORY  OF  PRACTICE  :  an 
Ethical  Enquiry.     2  vols.    Svo.   24s. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  REFLEC- 
TION.    2  vols.  Svo.  21S. 

OUTCAST  ESSAYS  AND  VERSE 
TRANSLATIONS.  Essays:  The 
Genius  of  De  Quincey — De  Quincey  as 
Political  Economist — The  Supernatural 
in  English  Poetry  ;  with  Note  on  the 
True  Symbol  of  Christian  Union — Eng- 
lish Verse.  Verse  Translations:  Nineteen 
Passages  from  Lucretius,  Horace,  Homer, 
&c.     Cr.  Svo.  8s.  6d. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


HOOPER  (George). 
ABRAHAM FABERT :  Governor  oiSe&^n, 
Marshall  of  France.     His  Life  and  Times, 
1599-1662.    With  a  Portrait.    8vo.  los.  6<f_ 

HOWITT  (William).  ; 

VISITS   TO  REMARKABLE  PLACES,  j 
Old    Halls,    Battle-Fields,   Scenes,    illus- 
trative of   Striking   Passages   in    English  j 
History  and  Poetry.       With  80  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6(/. 

HULLAH  (John). 

COURSE  OF  LECTURES  ON  THE 
HISTORY  OF  MODERN  MUSIC. 
Svo.  85.  6d. 

COURSE  OF  LECTURES  ON  THE 
TRANSITION  PERIOD  OF  MUSI- 
CAL HISTORY.     Svo.  I05.  6(.'. 

HUME  (David). 

THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  WORKS  OF 
DAVID  HUME.  Edited  by  T.  H. 
Green  and  T.  H.Grose.  4  vols.  8vo. 
565.  Or  separately.  Essays.  2  vols.  28s. 
Treatise  of  Human  Nature.     2  vols.  28s. 

HUTH  (Alfred  H.). 

THE  MARRIAGE  OF  NEAR  KIN, 
considered  with  respect  to  the  Law  of 
Nations,  the  Result  of  Experience  and 
the  Teachings  of  Biology.    Royal  Svo.  21s. 

HYNE  (C.  J.  Cutcliffe). 

THE  NEIV  EDEN:  a  Story.  With 
Frontispiece  and  Vignette.   Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

INGELOW  (Jean). 

POETICAL   WORKS.     2  vols.     Fcp.  Svo. 

125. 

LYRICAL  AND  OTHER  POEMS. 
Selected  from  the  Writings  of  Jean 
Ingelow.  Fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6cl.  cloth  plain, 
35.  cloth  gilt. 

JAMESON  (Mrs.). 

SACRED  AND  LEGENDARY  ART. 
With  ig  Etchings  and  187  Woodcuts.  2 
vols.     Svo.  205.  net. 

LEGENDS  OF  THE  MADONNA.  The 
Virgin  Mar}'  as  represented  in  Sacred  and 
Legendary  Art.  With  27  Etchings  and 
165  Woodcuts.     I  vol.     Svo.  I05.  net. 

LEGENDS  OF  THE  MONASTIC 
ORDERS.  With  II  Etchings  and  88 
Woodcuts.     I  vol.     Svo.    los.   net. 

HISTORY  OF  OUR  LORD.  His  Types 
and  Precursors.  Completed  by  Lady 
Eastlake.  With  31  Etchings  and  281 
Woodcuts.     2  vols.     Svo.  20s.  net. 


JEFFERIES  (Richard). 

FIELD  AND  HEDGEROW :  last  Essays. 
With  Portrait.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

THE  STORY  OF  MY  HEART:  my 
Autobiography.  With  Portrait  and  new 
Preface  by  C.  J.  Longman.  Cr.  Svo. 
35.  6d. 

RED  DEER.  With  17  Illustrations  by 
J.  Charlton  and  H.  Tunaly.  Cr.  Svo. 
35.  6d. 

THE  TOILERS  OF  THE  FIELD.  With 
Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury  Cathe- 
dral.    Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

JENNINGS  (Arthur  Charles,  M.A.). 
ECCLESIA    ANGLICANA.      A    History 
of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  England,  from 
the   Earliest  to  the   Present  Times.     Cr. 
Svo.  ys.  6d. 

JEWSBURY  (Geraldine  Endsor). 

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  LETTERS 
OF  GERALDINE  ENDSOR  JEWS- 
BURY TO  yANE  WELSH  CARLYLE. 
Edited  by  Mrs.  Alexander  Ireland. 
Prefaced  by  a  Monograph  on  Miss  Jews- 
bury  by  the  Editor.     Svo.  165. 

JOHNSON  (J.  and  J.  H.). 

THE  PATENTEE'S  MANUAL  :  a  Trea- 
tise on  the  Law  and  Practice  of  Letters 
Patent.     Svo.  los.  6d. 

JORDAN  (William  Leighon). 

THE  STANDARD  OF  VALUE.    Svo.  65. 

JUSTINIAN. 

THE  INSTITUTES  OF  yUSTINIAN : 
Latin  Text,  chiefly  that  of  Huschke,  with 
English  Introduction,  Translation,  Notes 
and  Summary.  By  Thomas  C.  Bandars, 
M.A.     Svo.  iSs. 

KALISCH  (M.  M.). 

BIBLE  STUDIES.  Part  I.  The  Prophe- 
cies of  Balaam.  Svo.  ros.  6d.  Part  II. 
The  Book  of  Jonah.     Svo.  105.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  OLD  TES- 
TAMENT:  with  a  New  Translation. 
Vol.  I.  Genesis.  Svo.  iSs.  Or  adapted 
for  the  General  Reader.  12s.  Vol.  II. 
Exodus.  155.  Or  adapted  for  the  General 
Reader.     125.     Vol.   III.    Leviticus,   Part 

I.  15s.       Or    adapted    for    the    General 
Reader.      S5.      Vol.   IV.    Leviticus,    Part 

II.  15s.      Or  adapted   for   the  General 
Reader.     S5. 

KANT  (Immanuel). 

CRITIQUE  OF  PRACTICAL  REASON, 
AND  OTHER  WORKS  ON  THE 
THEORY  OF  ETHICS.  Translated 
by  T.  K.  Abbott,  B.D.  With  Memoir. 
Svo.  I2S.  6d. 
I  [Continued  oil  next  page. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS.   GREEN,  d-  CO. 


KANT  (Immanuel)— (-o«//;n/,Y/. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC,  AND 
HIS  ESSAY  ON  THE  MISTAKEN 
SUBTILTY  OF  THE  FOUR 
FIGURES.  Translated     by     T.     K. 

Abbott,    and    with    Notes     by     S.     T. 
Coleridge.       8vo.  6s. 

KEITH   DERAMORE  :    a  Novel.      By  the 
Author  of  '  Molly '.     Cr.  8vo. 

KILLICK  (Rev.  A.  H.,  M.A.). 

HANDBOOK  TO  MILL'S  SYSTEM  OF 
LOGIC.     Cr.  8vo.  35.  6d. 

KNIGHT  (E.  F.). 

THE  CRUISE  OF  THE  '  ALERTE  '  : 
the  Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure 
on  the  Desert  Island  of  Trinidad.  With 
2  Maps  and  23  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo. 
35.  6J. 

LADD  (George  T.). 

ELEMENTS  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL 
PSYCHOLOGY.     Svo.  21s. 

OUTLINES  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL 
PSYCHOLOGY.  A  Text-book  of  Men- 
tal Science  for  Academies  and  Colleges. 

Svo.     I2S. 

LANG  (Andrew). 

HOMER  AND  THE  EPIC.  Cr.  8vo. 
gs.  net. 

CUSTOM  AND  MYTH  :  Studies  of  Early 
Usage  and  Belief.  With  15  Illustrations. 
Cr.  Svo.  js.  6d. 

BALLADS  OF  BOOKS.  Edited  by 
Andrew  Lang.     Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 

LETTERS  TO  DEAD  AUTHORS.  Fcp. 
Svo.  25.  6d.  net. 

BOOKS     AND     BOOKMEN.       With     2 
Coloured    Plates     and     17     Illustrations,   i 
Fcp.    Svo.  25.   dd.   net.  j 

OLD  FRIENDS.     Fcp.  Svo.  25.  6d.  ne  t .    | 

LETTERS  ON  LITERATURE.  Fcp. 
Svo.   25.    6d.  net.  j 

GRASS    OF    PARNASSUS.      Fcp.    Svo.  I 
25.  6d.  net. 

ANGLING  SKETCHES.     With  20  Illus- 
trations by  W.  G.  Burn  Murdoch.     Cr.  \ 
Svo.  75.  6d. 

THE  BLUE  FAIRY  BOOK.     Edited  by 
Andrew  Lang.     With  8  Plates  and  130  ; 
Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford 
and  G.  P.  Jacomb  Hood.     Cr.  Svo.  65. 

THE    RED    FAIRY  BOOK.      Edited   by 
Andrew  Lang.     With  4  Plates  and  96  ' 
Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford 
and  Lancelot  Speed.     Cr.  Svo.  65.  I 


LANG  (Andrew)— coiitiitiud. 

THE  GREEN  FAIRY  BOOK.  Edited 
by  Andrew  Lang.  With  11  Plates  and 
SS  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford. 
Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.  Edited 
by  Andrew  Lang.  With  12  Plates  and 
SS  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford 
and  Lancelot  Speed.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.  School 
Edition,  without  Illustrations.     Fcp.  Svo. 

25.  6</. 

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.  Special 
Edition,  printed  on  Indian  paper.  With 
Notes,  but  without  Illustrations.  Cr. 
Svo.  75.  6^/. 

LAVISSE  (Ernest,  Professor  at  the  Sor- 
bonne). 
GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  POLITI- 
CAL HISTORY  OF  EUROPE. 
Translated  by  Charles  Gross,  Ph.D. 
Cr.  Svo.  55. 

LECKY  (William  Edward  Hartpole). 

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  IN  THE 
EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. 

Library  Edition.     S  vols.     Svo.  £'j  4s. 

Cabinet  Edition.  England.  7  vols.  Cr. 
Svo.  6s.  each.  Ireland.  5  vols.  Cr. 
Svo.  65.  each. 

HISTORY  OF  EUROPEAN  MORALS 
FROM  AUGUSTUS  TO  CHARLE- 
MAGNE.    2  vols.      Cr.  Svo.  i6s. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  RISE  AND 
INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF 
RATIONALISM  IN  EUROPE.  2 
vols.     Cr.  Svo.  i6s. 

POEMS.     Fcp.  Svo.  55. 

LEES    (J.    A.)    and    CLUTTERBUCK 
(W.  J.). 
B.  C.   18S7:  A    RAMBLE  IN  BRITISH 
COLUMBIA.     With  Map  and  75  Illus- 
trations.    Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 

LEWES  (George  Henry). 

THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY, 
from  Thales  to  Comte.  2  vols.  Svo. 
325. 

LEYTON  (Frank). 

THE  SHADOWS   OF  THE  LAKE,  and 

other  Poems.     Cr.  Svo.  75.  6d. 
Cheap  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 

LLOYD  (F.  J.). 

THE    SCIENCE    OF  AGRICULTURE. 

Svo.    125. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


LONGMAN  (Frederick  W.). 

CHESS  OPENINGS.     Fcp.  8vo.  25.  6d. 
■     FREDERICK  THE  GREAT  AND  THE 
SEVEN    YEARS'    WAR.       Fcp.    8vo. 

25.    6c/. 

LONGMAN'S  MAGAZINE.  Published 
Monthly.     6ci. 

Vols.  1-20.     8vo.  5s.  each. 

LONGMANS'  NEW  ATLAS.  Political 
and  Physical.  For  the  Use  of  Schools 
and  Private  Persons.  Consisting  of  40 
Quarto  and  16  Octavo  Maps  and  Dia- 
grams, and  16  Plates  of  Views.  Edited 
by  Geo.  G.  Chisholm,  M.A.,  B.Sc. 
Imp.  4to.  or  Imp.  8vo.   12s.  6d. 

LONGMORE  (Surgeon   General   Sir  T., 

C.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  &c.). 
RICHARD     WISEMAN,     Surgeon     and 
Sergeant-Surgeon  to  Charles  II. :  a  Bio- 
graphical   Study.       With    Portrait     and 
Illustrations.     Svo.   105.  6(i. 

LOUDON  (J.  C). 

ENCYCLOPMDIA    OF    GARDENING. 

With   1000  Woodcuts.     8vo.   21s. 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  AGRICUL- 
TURE :  the  Laying-out,  Improvement 
and  Management  of  Landed  Property. 
With   1 100  Woodcuts.     Svo.  21s. 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  PLANTS:  the 
Specific  Character,  &c.,  of  all  Plants  found 
in  Great  Britain.  With  12,000  Woodcuts. 
8vo.  42s. 

LUBBOCK  (Sir  J.,  Bart.,   M.P.). 

THE     ORIGIN     OF     CIVILISATION, 

and  the  Primitive  Condition  of  Man. 
With  5  Plates  and  20  Illustrations  in  the 
Text.     Svo.  185. 

LYALL  (Edna,  Author  of  Donovan,'  &c.). 

THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  A  SLAN- 
DER,    rep.  Svo.  15.  sewed. 

Presentation  Edition.  With  20  Illustrations 
by  Lancelot  Speed.     Cr.  Svo.  55. 

LYDEKKER  (R.). 

PHASES  OF  ANIMAL  LIFE,  PAST 
AND  PRESENT.  With  82  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  Svo.  65. 

LYDE  (Lionel  W.). 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  ANCIENT 
HISTORY  :  being  a  Sketch  of  the  His- 
tory of  Egypt,  Mesopotamia,  Greece  and 
Rome.  With  a  Chapter  on  the  Develop- 
ment of  the  Roman  Empire  into  the 
Powers  of  Modern  Europe.  With  3 
Coloured  Maps.     Cr.  Svo.  35. 


LYONS  (Rev.  Daniel). 

CHRISTIANITY  AND  INFALLI- 
BILITY—Both  or  Neither.     Cr.  Svo.  55. 

LYTTON  (The  Earl  of).  (Owen  Meredith.) 

MARAH.     Fcp.  Svo.  65.  6d. 

KING  POPPY:  a  Fantasia.  With  i  Plate 
and  Design  on  Title-page  by  Ed.  Burne- 
JoNES,  A.R.A.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 

MACAU  LAY  (Lord). 

COMPLETE  WORKS  OF  LORD  MA- 
CAULAY  : 

Library  Edition.     8  vols.     Svo.  ^5  55. 
Cabinet  Edition.     16  vols.     Post  Svo. 
^4  165. 

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  FROM  THE 
ACCESSION  OF  JAMES  THE 
SECOND  : 

Popular  Edition.     2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.  55. 

Student's  Edition.    2  vols.    Cr.  Svo.  12s. 

People's  Edition.     4  vols.     Cr.  Svo.  165. 

Cabinet  Edition.    8  vols.     Post  Svo.  485. 

Library  Edition.     5  vols.     Svo.  £j^. 
CRITICAL     AND     HISTORICAL 
ESSAYS,  with   LAYS   OF  ANCIENT 
ROME,  in    i  vol.: 

Popular  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  25.  6d. 

Authorised  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  25.  6d.  or 
35.  6(/.  gilt  edges. 

'  Silver  Library'  Edition.   Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 
CRITICAL     AND     HISTORICAL 
ESS  A  YS  : 

Student's  Edition,      i  vol.      Cr.  Svo.  65. 

People's  Edition.     2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.  85. 

Trevelyan  Edition.    2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.  95. 

Cabinet  Edition.    4  vols.    Post  Svo.  245. 

Library  Edition.     3  vols.     Svo.  36s. 
ESS  A  YS  which  may  be  had  separately  price 
6d.  each  sewed,  15.  each  cloth  : 

Addison  and  Walpole. 

Frederick  the  Great. 

Croker's  Boswell's  Johnson. 

Hallam's  Constitutional  History. 

Warren  Hastings.  (3^.  sewed,  6d.  cloth.) 

The  Earl  of  Chatham  (Two  Essays). 

Ranke  and  Gladstone. 

Milton  and  Machiavelli. 

Lord  Bacon. 

Lord  Clive. 

Lord  Byron,  and  The  Comic  Dramatists 
of  the  Restoration. 


The  Essay  on  Warren  Hastings  anno- 
tated by  S.  Hales.     15.  6d. 
The  Essay  on  Lord  Clive  annotated  by 
H.  CouRTHOPE  Bowen,  M.A.     2S.6d. 
SPEECHES  : 

People's  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 

[Contmued  on  fwxt  page. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  <i-  CO. 


MACAU  LAY  {l^or  A— continued. 
LAYS  OF  ANCIENT  ROME,  &-c. : 

Illustrated   by  G.   Scharf.      Fcp.  4to. 

los.  6d. 
Bijou  Edi- 
tion.   i8mo.  25.  M.  gilt  top. 

, Popular 

Edition.       Fcp.    4to.   bd.   sewed,   is. 
cloth. 
Illustrated  by  J.   R.  Weguelin.      Cr. 

8vo.  3s.  bd.  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges. 
Cabinet  Edition.     Post  8vo.  3s.  bd. 
Annotated  Edition.   P"cp.  8vo.  is.  sewed, 
IS.  6(7.  cloth. 
MISCELLANEOUS   WRITINGS: 

People's  Edition,    i  vol.    Cr.  8vo.  45.  td. 
Library  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo.  21s. 
MISCELLANEOUS    WRITINGS    AND 
SPEECHES : 

Popular  Edition,     i  vol.    Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 
Student's  Edition,      i  vol.     Cr.  8vo.  65. 
Cabinet     Edition.        Including     Indian 
Penal  Code,  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome 
and    Miscellaneous    Poems.     4   vols. 
Post  8vo.  24s. 
SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS 
OF  LORD  MAC  A  ULA  Y.     Edited,  with 
Occasional   Notes,  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir 
G.  O.  Trevelvan,  Bart.     Cr.  8vo.  .6s. 
THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  LORD 
MACAU  LAY.     By  the  Right  Hon.  Sir 
G.  O.  Trevelyan,  Bart.  : 

Popular  Edition,  i  vol.  Cr.  8vo.  2s.  bd. 
Student's  Edition,  i  vol.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 
Cabinet  Edition.  2  vols.  Post  8vo.  12s. 
Library  Edition.      2  vols.  8vo.  36s. 

MACDONALD  (George,  LL.D.).  j 

UNSPOKEN  SERMONS.     Three  Series.  ' 

Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  each.  j 

THE  MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD.     Cr.  I 

8vo.  3s.  5(7.  I 

A  BOOK  OF  STRIFE,  IN  THE  FORM 

OF  THE  DIARY  OF  AN  OLD  SOUL  : 

Poems.     i2mo.  6s. 

MACDONELL  (Arthur  A.,  M.A.,  Ph.D., 
(Deputy)  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the 
University  of  Oxford). 
A  SANSKRIT-ENGLISH  DICTION- 
ARY: being  a  Practical  Handbook,  with 
Transliteration,  Accentuation  and  Ety- 
mological Analysis  throughout.  4to. 
£2   2S. 

MACFARREN  (Sir  G.  A.). 

LECTURES  ON  HARMONY.     8vo.  12s. 
MACKAIL  (J.  W.). 

SELECT  EPIGRAMS  FROM  THE 
GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.  Edited  with 
a  Revised  Text,  Introduction,  Translation 
and  Notes.     8vo.  i6s. 


MACLEOD  (Henry  D.). 

THE     ELEMENTS      OF     BANKING. 

Cr.   8vo.   3s.  6d. 
THE    THEORY   AND    PRACTICE    OF 

BANKING.    Vol.  I.     8vo.  12s.    Vol.  11. 

14s. 
THE     THEORY    OF     CREDIT.       8vo. 

Vol.  I.     7s.  6d.     Vol.  II.    Part  I.     4s.  6d. 

Vol.  II.    Part  II.      IDS.  6d. 

MANNERING  (George  Edward). 

WITH  AXE  AND  ROPE  IN  THE 
NEW  ZEALAND  ALPS.  With  18 
Illustrations.     8vo.     12s.  6d. 

MANUALS  OF  CATHOLIC  PHILO- 
SOPHY {Stanyliitrst  Scries)  : 

LOGIC.  By  Richard  F.  Clarke,  S.J. 
Cr.   8vo.   5s. 

FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  KNOW- 
LEDGE. By  John  Rickabv,  S.J.  Cr. 
8vo.  5s. 

MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  {ETHICS  AND 
NATURAL  LAW).  By  Joseph  Rick- 
aby,  S.J.     Cr.  8vo.  5s. 

GENERAL  METAPHYSICS.  By  John 
Rickabv,  S.J.     Cr.  8vo.  5s. 

PSYCHOLOGY.  By  Michael  Maher, 
S.J.     Cr.  8vo.  6s.  6d. 

NATURAL  THEOLOGY.  By  Bernard 
BoEDDER,  S.J.     Cr.  8vo.  6s.  6(7. 

POLITICAL  ECONOMY.  By  Charles 
S.  Devas.     Cr.  8vo.  6s.  5d. 

MARBOT  (Baron  de). 

THE  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  BARON  DE 
MARBOT.  Translated  from  the  French. 
2  vols.  8vo.  32s. 

MARTINEAU  (James,   D.D.,  LL.D.). 
HOURS    OF  THOUGHT  ON  SACRED 
THINGS.      Two  Volumes  of  Sermons. 
2  vols.     Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6(7.  each. 
ENDEAVOURS  AFTER   THE   CHRIS- 
TIAN   LIFE.       Discourses.      Cr.    8vo. 
7s.  6(7. 
THE   SEAT  OF  AUTHORITY  IN  RE 

LIGION.     8vo.  14s. 
ESSAYS,        REVIEWS        AND        AD- 
DRESSES.      4  vols.       Cr.   8vo.  7s.  6(/. 
each. 

I.  Personal :  Political. 
II.   Ecclesiastical :   Historical. 

III.  Theological :  Philosophical. 

IV.  Academical :   Religious. 
HOME  PRAYERS,  with  Two  Services  for 

Public  Worship.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6(7. 

MATTHEWS  (Brander). 

A  FAMILY  TREE,  and  other  Stories. 
Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

[Continued  on  next  page. 


A   CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


MATTHEWS  {Brnnder)— continued. 

PEN  AND   INK  :   Papers  on  Subjects  of 

more  or  less  Importance.      Cr.  8vo.  5s. 
WITH    MY    FRIENDS  :    Tales   told   in 
Partnership.    With  an  Introductory  Essay 
on  the  Art  and  Mystery  of  Collaboration. 
Cr.  8vo.  65. 

MAUNDER'S  TREASURIES. 

BIOGRAPHICAL  TREASURY.  With 
Supplement  brought  down  to  i88g.  By 
Rev.  James  Wood.     Fcp.  Svo.  65. 

TREASURY  OF  NATURAL  HISTORY: 
or,  Popular  Dictionary  of  Zoology.  With 
goo  Woodcuts.     Fcp.  Svo.  65. 

TREASURY  OF  GEOGRAPHY,  Physi- 
cal, Historical,  Descriptive  and  Political. 
With  7  Maps  and  16  Plates.     Fcp.  Svo.  95. 

SCIENTIFIC  AND  LITERARY  TREA- 
SURY.    Fcp.  Svo.  65. 

HISTORICAL  TREASURY:  Outlines  of 
Universal  History,  Separate  Histories  of 
all  Nations.     Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 

TREASURY  OF  KNOWLEDGE  AND 
LIBRARY  OF  REFERENCE.  Com- 
prising an  English  Dictionary  and  Gram- 
mar, Universal  Gazetteer,  Classical 
Dictionary,  Chronology,  Law  Dictionary, 
&c.     Fcp.  Svo.  65. 

THE  TREASURY  OF  BIBLE  KNOW- 
LEDGE. By  the  Rev.  J.  Ayre,  M.A. 
With  5  Maps,  15  Plates  and  300  Wood- 
cuts.    Fcp.  Svo.  65. 

THE  TREASURY  OF  BOTANY.  Edited 
by  J.  LiNDLEY,  F.R.S.,  and  T.  Moore, 
F.L.S.  With  274  Woodcuts  and  20  Steel 
Plates.     2  vols.     Fcp.  Svo.  12s. 

MAX  MULLER  (F.,  Professor  of  Com- 
parative Philology  in  the  University  of 
Oxford). 

SELECTED  ESSAYS  ON  LANGUAGE, 
MYTHOLOGY  AND  RELIGION. 
2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.   i6s. 

THE  SCIENCE  OF  LANGUAGE, 
Founded  on  Lectures  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institution  in  1861  and  1S63.  2  vols. 
Cr.  Svo.  215. 

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE 
OF  LANG  UAGE  AND  ITS  PLACE  IN 
GENERAL  EDUCATION,  delivered  at 
the  Oxford  University  Extension  Meeting, 
i8Sg.     Cr.  Svo.  35. 

HIBBERT  LECTURES  ON  THE  ORI- 
GIN AND  GROWTH  OF  RELIGION, 
as  illustrated  by  the  Religions  of  India. 
Cr.  Svo.  75.  6d. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SCIENCE 
OF  RELIGION :  Four  Lectures  delivered 
at  the  Royal  Institution.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 


MAX  MULLER  {F.)~coutliincd. 

NATURAL  RELIGION.  The  Gifford 
Lectures  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Glasgow  in  18S8.     Cr.  Svo.  105.  6d. 

PHYSICAL  RELIGION.  The  Giiford 
Lectures  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Glasgow  in  1S90.     Cr.  Svo.  105.  6d. 

ANTHROPOLOGICAL  RELIGION  : 
The  Gifford  Lectures  delivered  before  the 
University  of  Glasgow  in  1S91.  Cr.  Svo. 
I05.  6d. 

THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.  8vo. 
21S. 

THREE  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES 
ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT. 
Svo.  25.  6d. 

BIOGRAPHIES  OF  WORDS,  AND  THE 
HOME  OF  THE  ARYAS.  Cr.  Svo. 
75.  6d. 

INDIA,  WHAT  CAN  IT  TEACH  US.? 
Cr.  Svo.  35.  6</. 

A  SANSKRIT  GRAMMAR  FOR  BE- 
GINNERS. Abridged  Edition.  By  A. 
A.   MacDonell.      Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

MAY  (Sir  Thomas  Erskine,   K.C.E.). 
THE    CONSTITUTIONAL    HISTORY 
OF  ENGLAND  since  the  Accession  of 
George  III.  1760-1S70.  3  vols.  Cr.  Svo.  185. 

MEADE  (L.  T.). 

DADDY'S  BOY.  With  Illustrations.  Cr. 
Svo.  35.  6d. 

DEB  AND  THE  DUCHESS.  With 
Illustrations  by  M.  E.  Edwards.  Cr. 
Svo.  35.  6d. 

THE  BERESFORD  PRIZE.  With  Illus- 
trations by  M.  E.  Edwards.     Cr.  Svo.  55. 

MEATH  (The  Earl  of). 

SOCIAL  ARROWS:  Reprinted  Articles  on 
various  Social  Subjects.     Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

PROSPERITY  OR  PAUPERISM  .> 
Physical,  Industrial  and  Technical  Train- 
ing.    Svo.  5s. 

MELVILLE  (G.  J.  Whyte). 
THE  GLAD/A  TORS. 
THE  INTERPRETER. 
GOOD  FOR  NOTHING. 
THE  QUEEN'S  MARIES. 
HOLM  BY  HOUSE. 
KATE  COVENTRY. 
DIGBY  GRAND. 
GENERAL  BOUNCE. 
Cr.  Svo.  15.  each  boards.  15.  6rf.  each  cloth- 

MENDELSSOHN  (Felix). 

THE  LETTERS  OF  FELIX  MENDELS- 
SOHN. Translated  by  Lady  Wallace. 
2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.  I05. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  d  CO. 


MERIVALE  (The  Very  Rev.  Chas.,  Dean 
of  Ely). 

HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  UNDER 
THE  EMPIRE.  Cabinet  Edition.  8 
vols.     Cr.  8vo.  48s. 

Popular    Edition.      8   vols.      Cr.   8vo. 
35.  6(7.  each. 

THE  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  RE- 
PUBLIC :  2L  Short  History  of  the  Last 
Century  of  the  Commonwealth.  i2mo. 
ys.  6d. 

GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  ROME  FROM 
B.C.  753  TO  A.D.  476.     Cr.  Svo.  75.  6d. 

THE  ROMAN  TRIUMVIRATES.  With 
Maps.     P'cp.  Svo.  25.  6(7. 

MILL  (James). 
ANALYSIS    OF    THE    PHENOMENA 
OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.      2    vols. 
8vo.  28s. 

MILL  (John  Stuart). 

PRINCIPLES  OF  POLITICAL  ECO- 
NOMY. 

Library  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo.  30s. 
People's  Edition,    i  vol.    Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6(7. 

A  SYSTEM  OF  LOGIC.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6(7. 

ON  LIBERTY.     Cr.  Svo.  is.  ^d. 

ON  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERN- 
MENT.    Cr.   Svo.   2s. 

UTILITARIANISM.     Svo.  5s. 

EXAMINATION  OF  SIR  WILLIAM 
HAMILTON'S  PHILOSOPHY.  Svo. 
165. 

NATURE,  THE  UTILITY  OF  RELI- 
GION, AND  THEISM.  Three  Essays. 
Svo.  55. 

MOLESWORTH  (Mrs.). 

SILVERTHORNS.  Illustrated.  Cr.8vo.55. 

THE  PALACE  IN  THE  GARDEN. 
Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.  55. 

THE  THIRD  MISS  ST.  QUENTIN. 
Cr.   Svo.  65. 

NEIGHBOURS.    Illustrated.     Cr.8vo.6s. 

THE  STORY  OF  A  SPRING  MORN- 
ING, S'c.     Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.  55. 

STORIES  OF  THE  SAINTS  FOR 
CHILDREN  :  the  Black  Letter  Saints. 
Illustrated.     Royal  i6mo.  55. 

MOORE  (Edward,    D.D.,   Principal  of  St. 
Edmund  Hall,   Oxford). 
DANTE    AND   HIS    EARLY  BIOGRA- 
PHERS.    Cr.  Svo.  75.  6(7. 

MULHALL  (Michael  G.). 
HISTORY    OF    PRICES    SINCE    THE 
YEAR  1850.     Cr.  Svo.  65. 


NANSEN  (Dr.   Fridtjof). 

THE  FIRST  CROSSING  OF  GREEN- 
LAND. 

Abridged  Edition.  With  numerous  Illus- 
trations and  a  Map.     Cr.  Svo.  7s.  6(7. 

NESBIT  (E.)  (Mrs.  Hubert  Bland.) 
LEAVES  OF  LIFE  :  Verses.     Cr.  Svo.  55. 
LAYS    AND    LEGENDS.      First   Series. 

New    and   Cheaper    Edition.       Cr.    Svo. 

3s.  6(7.      Second   Series.     With  Portrait. 

Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

NEWMAN  (Cardinal). 

APOLOGIA  PRO  VItA  SUA.  Cabinet 
Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  Cheap  Edition. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.   6(7. 

DISCOURSES  TO  MIXED  CONGRE- 
GATIONS. Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo. 
6s.     Cheap  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6(7. 

SERMONS  ON  VARIOUS  OCCASIONS. 
Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  Cheap 
Edition.     35.  6(7. 

THE  IDEA  OF  A  UNIVERSITY 
DEFINED  AND  ILLUSTRATED. 
Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  7s.  Cheap 
Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6(7. 

HISTORICAL  SKETCHES.  3  vols. 
Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  each. 
Cheap  Edition.     3  vols.     3s.  6d.  each. 

THE  ARIANS  OF  THE  FOURTH 
CENTURY.  Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo. 
65.     Cheap  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6(7. 

SELECT  TREATISES  OH  ST.  ATHA- 
NASIUS  in  Controversy  with  the  Arians. 
Freely  Translated.     2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.  15s. 

DISCUSSIONS  AND  ARGUMENTS 
ON  VARIOUS  SUByECTS.  Cabinet 
Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  Cheap  Edition. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6(7. 

AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  DEVELOPMENT 
OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.  Cabinet 
Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  65.  Cheap  Edition. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6(/. 

CERTAIN  DIFFICULTIES  FELT  BY 
ANGLICANS  IN  CA  THOLIC  TEACH- 
ING CONSIDERED.  Cabinet  Edition. 
Vol.  I.  Cr.  Svo.  75.  6(7.  Vol.  II.  Cr, 
Svo.  55.  6(7.  Cheap  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr. 
Svo.  3s.  6(7.  each. 

THE  VIA  MEDIA  OF  THE  ANGLI- 
CAN CHURCH.  Illustrated  in  Lectures, 
&.C.  2  vols.  Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo. 
65.  each.  Cheap  Edition.  2  vols.  3s.  6(7. 
each. 

ESSAYS,  CRITICAL  AND  HISTORI- 
CAL. Cabinet  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr. 
Svo.  I2S.  Cheap  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr. 
Svo.  7s. 

[^Continued  on  next  page. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


NEWMAN  [Cas^vasX)— continued. 

ESSAYS  ON  BIBLICAL  AND  ON 
ECCLESIASTICAL  MIRACLES. 
Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  8vo.  6s.  Cheap 
Edition.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

TRACTS.  I.  Dissertatiunculffi.  2.  On  the 
Text  of  the  Seven  Epistles  of  St.  Igna- 
tius. 3.  Doctrinal  Causes  of  Arianism. 
4.  Apollinarianism.  5.  St.  Cyril's  For- 
mula. 6.  Ordo  de  Tempore.  7.  Douay 
Version  of  Scripture.     Cr.  8vo.  8s. 

AN  ESSAY  IN  AID  OF  A  GRAMMAR 
OF  ASSENT.  Cabinet  Edition.  Cr. 
Svo.  7s.  6d.  Cheap  Edition.  Cr.  8vo. 
35.  6d. 

PRESENT  POSITION  OF  CATHOLICS 
IN  ENGLAND.  Cabinet  Edition.  Cr. 
Svo.  7s.  6d.  Cheap  Edition.  Cr.  Svo. 
3s.  6^. 

CALLISTA  :  a  Tale  of  the  Third  Century. 
Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  Cheap 
Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

LOSS  AND  GAIN :  a  Tale.  Cabinet 
Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  Cheap  Edition. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

THE  DREAM  OF  GERONTIUS.  i6mo. 
6d.  sewed,     is.  cloth. 

VERSES  ON  VARIOUS  OCCASIONS. 
Cabinet  Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  Cheap 
Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

FABULAE  QUAE  DAM  EX  TERENTIO 
ETPLAUTOAD  USUM PUERORUM 
ACCOMMODATAE.  With  English 
Notes  and  Translations  to  assist  the 
representation.  Cardinal  Newman's  Edi- 
tion.     Cr."  Svo.  6s. 

*^*  For  Cardinal  Newman's  other  Works 
see  Messrs.  Longmans  and  Co.'s  Cata- 
logue of  Clturch  of  England  Theological 
Works, 

NORTON  (Charles  L.).  i 

.4  HANDBOOK  OF  FLORIDA.  With 
49   Maps  and  Plans.     Fcp.  Svo.   5s. 

O'BRIEN  (William,   M.P.).  [ 

WHEN    WE    WERE    BOYS:    a  Novel.' 

Cr.  Svo.  2s.  td.  ' 

I 

OLIPHANT  (Mrs.).  | 

MADAM.    Cr.  Svo.  IS.  boards,    is.  6r/.  cloth,  j 

IN  TRUST.   Cr.  Svo.  is.  boards,    is.  6d.  cl.  j 

OMAN  (C.  W.  C,   M.A.,  F.S.A.).  i 

A  HISTORY  OF  GREECE  FROM  THE 
EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  THE  MACE- 
DONIAN CONQUEST.  With  Maps 
and  Plans.     Cr.  Svo.  4s.  6d.  \ 

PARKES  (Sir  Henry,  G.C.M.G.). 
FIFTY  YEARS  IN  THE  MAKING  OF 
AUSTRALIAN    HISTORY.      With    2] 
Portraits  (1854  and  1892).   2  vols.  Svo.  32s. 


PAUL  (Hermann). 

PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF 
LANGUAGE.  Translated  by  H.  A. 
Strong.     Svo.  los.  6^/. 

PAYN  (James). 

THE     LUCK    OF    THE     DARRELLS. 

Cr.  Svo.  IS.  boards,     is.  6d.  cloth. 
THICKER    THAN    WATER.      Cr.  Svo. 

IS.   boards,      is.   6d.  cloth. 

PERRING  (Sir  Philip). 

HARD    KNOTS    IN    SHAKESPEARE- 

Svo.  7s.  6d. 
THE      'WORKS      AND      DAYS'      OF 
MOSES.     Cr.    Svo.  3s.  6d. 

PHILLIPPS-WOLLEY  (C). 

SNAP  :  a  Legend  of  the  Lone  Mountain. 
With  13  Illustrations  by  H.  G.  Willink. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

POLE  (W.,  F.R.S.). 

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  MODERN 
SCIENTIFIC  GAME  OF  WHIST. 
Fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

POOLE  (W.  H.  and  Mrs.). 

COOKERY  FOR  THE  DIABETIC. 
With  Preface  by  Dr.  Pavy.  Fcp.  Svo. 
2s.  6d. 

PRAEGER  (Ferdinand). 

WAGNER  AS  I  KNEW  HIM.  Cr.  Svo. 
7s.  6d. 

PRATT  (A.  E.,  F.R.G.S.). 

TO  THE  SNOWS  OF TIBETTHROUGH 
CHINA.  With  33  Illustrations  and  a 
Map.     Svo.  iSs. 

PRENDERGAST  (John  P.). 

IRELAND,  FROM  THE  RESTORA- 
TION TO  THE  REVOLUTION, 
1660- 1690.     Svo.   5s. 

PROCTOR  (Richard  A.). 

OLD  AND  NEW  ASTRONOMY.  By 
Richard  A.  Proctor  and  A.  Cowper 
Ranyard.  With  31  Plates  and  472 
Woodcuts.     4to.  36s. 

THE  ORBS  AROUND  US:  a  Series  of 
Essays  on  the  Moon  and  Planets,  Meteors 
and  Comets.  With  Chart  and  Diagrams. 
Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS:  The 
Plurality  of  Words  Studied  under  the 
Light  of  Recent  Scientific  Researches. 
With  14  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo.  5.<:. 
Silver  Library  Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 
[Continued  on  next  page. 


I 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO. 


PROCTOR  (Richard  K.)— continued. 

THE  MOON  :  her  Motions,  Aspects, 
Scenery  and  Physical  Condition.  With 
Plates,  Charts,  Woodcuts,  &c.    Cr.  8vo.  55. 

UNIVERSE  OF  STARS  :  Presenting 
Researches  into  and  New  Views  respect- 
ing the  Constitution  of  the  Heavens. 
With  22  Charts  and  22  Diagrams.  8vo. 
I05.  6d. 

LARGER  STAR  ATLAS  for  the  Library. 
In  12  Circular  Maps.  With  Introduction 
and  2  Index  Pages.  Folio  15s.  Or  Maps 
only  I2S.  6(f. 

THE  STUDENT'S  ATLAS.  In  12  Cir- 
cular Maps  on  a  Uniform  Projection  and 
one  Scale.     8vo.  5s. 

NEW  STAR  ATLAS  for  the  Library, 
the  School  and  the  Observatory.  In  12 
Circular  Maps.     Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

LIGHT  SCIENCE  FOR  LEISURE 
HOURS.  Familiar  Essays  on  Scientific 
Subjects.     3  vols.     Cr.  8vo.  55.  each. 

CHANCE  AND  LUCK  :  a  Discussion  of 
the  Laws  of  Luck,  Coincidences,  Wagers, 
Lotteries  and  the  Fallacies  of  Gambling, 
&c.  Cr.  Svo.  2s.  boards,  2s.  6cL  cloth. 
■  STUDIES  OF  VENUS-TRANSITS. 
With  7  Diagrams  and  10  Plates.    8vo.  5s. 

HOW  TO  PLAY  WHIST:  WITH  THE 
LAWS  AND  ETIQUETTE  OF 
WHIST.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

HOME  WHIST  :  an  Easy  Guide  to  Cor-  i 
rect  Play.     i6mo.  is.  \ 

THE    STARS    IN    THEIR    SEASONS.  [ 
An  Easy  Guide  to  a  Knowledge  of  the 
Star  Groups.     In  12  Maps.    Roy.  Svo.  55.  i 

STAR  PRIMER.  Showing  the  Starry  Sky  \ 
Week  by  Week.  In  24  Hourly  Maps.  ', 
Cr.  4to.  2J.  6d. 

THE     SEASONS     PICTURED    IN    48 
SUN-VIEWS    OF  THE  EARTH,  and  | 
24  Zodiacal  Maps,  &c.     Demy  4to.  5s.         j 

STRENGTH  AND  HAPPINESS.  With  | 
9  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  55.  \ 

STRENGTH :    How   to   get    Strong    and  | 
keep   Strong,  with   Chapters   on  Rowing 
and  Swimming,  Fat,  Age  and  the  Waist. 
With  9  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  2S.  ! 

ROUGH  WAYS  MADE  SMOOTH.  \ 
Familiar  Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects,  j 
Cr.  Svo.  5s.  Silver  Library  Edition.  1 
Cr.  Svo.  35.  6rf.  I 

OUR  PLACE  AMONG  INFINITIES. 
A  Series  of  Essays  contrasting  our  Little 
Abode  in  Space  and  Time  with  the  Infini- 
ties around  us.     Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

THE  EXP  A  NSE  OF  HE  A  VEN.  Essays  on 
the  Wondersof  the  Firmament.  Cr.Svo.  5s. 

THE  GREAT  PYRAMID,  OBSERVA- 
TORY, TOMB  AND  TEMPLE.  V\^ith 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  5s. 


PROCTOR  (Richard  A.)— continued. 

PLEASANT  WAYS  IN  SCIENCE.  Cr. 
Svo.  55.  Silver  Library  Edition.  Cr. 
Svo.  3s.  6d. 

MYTHS  AND  MARVELS  OF  ASTRO- 
NOMY.    Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

NATURE  STUDIES.  By  R.  A.  Proctok, 
Grant  Allen,  A.  Wilson,  T.  Foster, 
and  E.  Clodd.     Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

LEISURE  READINGS.  By  R.  A.  Proc- 
tor, E.  Clodd,  A.  Wilson,  T.  Foster, 
and  A.  C.  Ranyard.     Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

RANSOME  (Cyril,  M.A.). 

THE  RISE  OF  CONSTITUTIONAL  GO- 
VERNMENT IN  ENGLAND  :  being  a 
Series  of  Twenty  Lectures  on  the  History 
of  the  English  Constitution  delivered  to  a 
Popular  Audience.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

RAWLINSON    (George,    M.A.,  Canon  of 
Canterbury,  &c.). 
THE  HIS  TORY  OF  PHCENICIA .    With 
numerous  Illustrations.     Svo.  24s. 

READER  (Emily  E.). 

VOICES  FROM  FLOWER-LAND:  a 
Birthday  Book  and  Language  of  Flowers. 
Illustrated  by  Ada  Brooke.  Royal  i6mo. 
cloth,  2s.  6d. ;  vegetable  vellum,  3s.  Qd. 

RIBOT  (Th.). 

THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ATTENTION. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s. 

RICH  (A.). 

A  DICTIONARY  OF  ROMAN  AND 
GREEK  ANTIQUITIES.  With  2000 
Woodcuts.     Cr.  Svo.  7s.  6d. 

RICHARDSON  (Dr.   B.  W.). 

NATIONAL  HEALTH.  Abridged  from 
'The  Health  of  Nations'.  A  Review  of 
the  Works  of  Sir  Edwin  Chadwick,  K.C.B. 
Cr.  4s.  6d. 

RILEY  (Athelstan,  M.A.,  F.R.G.S.). 
ATHOS  :  or,  the  Mountain  of  the  Monks. 
With  Map  and  29  Illustrations.     Svo.  21s. 

RILEY  (James  Whitcomb). 

OLD-FASHIONED  ROSES :  Poems. 
i2mo.  5s. 

RIVERS  (Thomas  and  T.  F.). 

THE  MINIATURE  FRUIT  GARDEN: 
or.  The  Culture  of  Pyramidal  and  Bush 
Fruit  Trees.  With  32  Illustrations.  Cr. 
Svo.  4s. 

RIVERS  (Thomas). 

THE  ROSE  AMATEUR'S  GUIDE. 
Fcp.  Svo.  4s.  6d. 

ROBERTSON  (A.). 

THE  KIDNAPPED  SQUATTER,  and 
other  Australian  Tales.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


ROGET  (John  Lewis). 
A  HISTORY  OF  THE  'OLD  WATER- 
COLOUR'  SOCIETY  (now  the  Royal 
Society  of  Painters  in  Water-Colours). 
With  Biographical  Notices  of  its  Older 
and  all  its  Deceased  Members  and  Asso- 
ciates.    2  vols.     Royal  8vo.  42s. 

ROGET  (Peter  M.). 

THESAURUS  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS 
AND  PHRASES.  Classified  and  Ar- 
ranged so  as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression 
of  Ideas  and  assist  in  Literary  Composi- 
tion. Recomposed  throughout,  enlarged 
and  improved,  partly  from  the  Author's 
Notes,  and  with  a  full  Index,  by  the 
Author's  Son,  John  Lewis  Roget.  Cr. 
8vo.  105.  6d. 

ROMANES  (George  John,  M.A.,  LL.D., 
F.R.S.). 
DARWIN,  AND  AFTER  DARWIN: 
an  Exposition  of  the  Darwinian  Theory 
and  a  Discussion  of  Post-Darwinian  Ques- 
tions. Part  I.  The  Darwinian  Theory. 
With  Portrait  of  Darwin  and  125  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  8vo.  los.  6d. 

RONALDS  (A.). 

THE  FLY-FISHER\S  ENTOMOLOGY. 
Wth  20  Coloured  Plates.     8vo.  14s. 

ROSSETTI  (Maria  Francesca). 

A  SHADOW  OF  DANTE:  being  an 
Essay  towards  studying  Himself,  his 
World  and  his  Pilgrimage.  With  Illus- 
trations.    Cr.  8vo.  los.  6(/. 

ROUND  (J.  H.,  M.A.). 
GEOFFREY    DE     MANDEVILLE  :     a 
Study  of  the  Anarchy.     8vo.   i6s. 

RUSSELL  (Earl). 

A  LIFE   OF  LORD  JOHN  RUSSELL 

{EARL  RUSSELL,  K.G.).    By  Spencer 

Walpole.      With  2   Portraits.       2  vols. 

8vo.  36s.     Cabinet  Edition.     2  vols.     Cr. 

8vO.    125. 

SEEBOHM  (Frederic). 

THE    OXFORD   REFORMERS— JOHN 

COLET,  ERASMUS   AND   THOMAS 

MORE  :  a  History  of  their  Fellow-Work. 

8vo.  145. 
THE    ENGLISH    VILLAGE    COMMU- 

NITY  Examined  in  its  Relations  to  the 

Manorial    and  Tribal    Systems,  &c.      13 

Maps  and  Plates.     8vo.   16s. 
THE    ERA    OF    THE    PROTESTANT 

REVOLUTION.    With  Map.    Fcp.  8vo. 

2s.  bd. 


SEWELL  (Elizabeth  M.). 

AMY  HERBERT. 
THE  EARL'S  DAUGHTER. 
THE  EXPERIENCE  OF  LIFE. 
A  GLIMPSE  OF  THE   WORLD. 
CLEVE  HALL. 
KATHARINE  ASH  TON. 
MARGARET  PERCIVAL. 
LANE  TON  PA  RSONA  GE. 
URSULA.         GERTRUDE. 
IVORS.  HOME  LIFE. 

AFTER  LIFE. 
Cr.  8vo.   IS.  bd.  each  cloth  plain.     2s.  6(/. 
each  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges. 

SHAKESPEARE. 

BOWDLER'S  FAMILY  SHAKES- 
PEARE. With  36  Woodcuts.  I  vol. 
8vo.  14s.     Or  in  6  vols.     Fcp.  8vo.  21s. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  LIFE  OF 
SHAKESPEARE.  By  J.  O.  Halliwell- 
Phillipps.  With  numerous  Illustrations 
and    Fac-similes.      2   vols.      Royal    8vo. 

A  CALENDAR  OF  THE  HALLIWELL- 
PHILLIPPS'  COLLECTION.  OF 
SHAKESPEAREAN  RARITIES  En- 
larged by  Ernest  E.  Baker,  F.S.A. 
8vo.  I05.  6d. 

THE  SHAKESPEARE  BIRTHDAY 
BOOK.  By  Mary  F.  Dunbar.  32mo. 
IS.  6(7.  cloth.  With  Photographs.  32mo. 
5s.  Drawing-Room  Edition,  with  Photo- 
graphs.    Fcp.  8vo.  los.  6d. 

SHERBROOKE  (Viscount). 

LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  THE  RIGHT 
HON.  ROBERT  LOWE,  VISCOUNT 
SHERBROOKE,  G.C.B.,  together  with 
a  Memoir  of  his  Kinsman,  Sir  John 
CoAPE  Sherbrooke,  G.C.B.  By  A. 
Patchett  Martin.  With  5  Copper-plate 
Portraits,  &c.      2  vols.     8vo. 

SHIRRES  (L.  P.). 

AN  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  IDEAS  OF 
ECONOMICS.     Cr.  8vo.  65. 

SIDGWICK  (Alfred). 

DISTINCTION :  and  the  Criticism  of 
Belief.     Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

SILVER    LIBRARY   (THE).      Cr.  8vo. 

y.  6d.  each  volume. 

Baker's  (Sir  S.  W.)  Eight  Years  in  Ceylon. 
With  6  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 

Baker's  (Sir  S.  W.)  Rifle  and  Hound  in  Ceylon. 
With  6  Illustrations,     y  6"'- 

Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Curious  Mytlis  of  tlie 
Middle  Ages.     3^.  6d. 

Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Origin  and  Develop- 
ment of  Religious  Belief.     2  vols.     7s. 

Brassey's  (Lady)  A  Voyage  in  the  'Sunbeam'. 
W'ith  66  Illustrations.     3^.  6d. 

[Continued  on  next  page. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO. 


SILVER  LIBRARY  {TllR)-continucd. 

Clodci's  (E.)  Story  of  Creation;  a  Plain  Account 

of  Evolution.     With  77  Illustrations.     y.6d. 

Conybeare  (Rev.  Y/.  J.)  and   Howson's  (Very 

Rev.  J.  S.)  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul. 

46  Illustrations.     Cr.  8\o.  3.?.  6d. 
Doug'airs  (L.)  Beggars  All :  a  Novel.     Cr.   8vo. 

3^.  6d. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  Micah  Clarke.      A  Tale  of 

Monmouth's  Rebellion,     y.  6d. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  The  Captain  of  the  Polestar, 

and  other  Tales.     Cr.  8vo.  3.?.  6d. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  Short  Studies  on  Great  Sub- 
jects.    4  vols.     3^.  6d.  each. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  Cssar :  a  Sketch,     y.  6d. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  Thomas  Carlyle :  a  History  of 

his   Life.       1795-1835.      2  vols.      1834-1881. 

2  vols.     7^.  each. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Two  Chiefs  of  Dunboy :  an 

Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  Century,     y.  6d. 
Gleig's    (Rev.    G.    R.)    Life    of    the    Duke    of 

Wellington.     With  Portrait,     y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  She  :  A  History  of  Adventure. 

32  Illustrations.     3.?.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)    Allan   Quatcrmain.      With 

20  Illustrations.     3.?.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Colonel  Quaritoh,  V.C.  :    a 

Tale  of  Country  Life.     35.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Cleopatra.      With  29  Full- 

paf^e  Illustrations.     3?.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Beatrice.     3^^.  6d. 
Harte's  (Bret)  In  the  Garquinez  Woods  and 

other  Stories.     3^.  6d. 
Howitt's   (W.)   Visits   to   Remarkable   Places. 

80  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Jefferies'  (R.)   The    Story  of  My  Heart :    My 

Autobiography.     With  Portrait,     y.  6d. 
Jefferies'    (R.)    Field    and    Hedgerow.       Last 

Essays  of.     With  Portrait.     3^-.  6d. 
Jefferies'  (R.)  Red  Deer.     With  17  Illustrations 

by  J.  Charlton  and  H.  Tunai.y.    Cr.  8vo. 

3J.  6d. 
Knight's  (E.  F.)  The  Cruise  of  the    'Alerte': 

the  Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on  i 

the    Desert    Island    of    Trinidad.      With    2  1 

Maps  and  23  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.  3J-.  6d.     I 
Lees  (J.  A.)  and  Clutterbuck's   (W.   J.)  B.  C. 

1887,  A  Ramble  in  British  Columbia.     With  I 

Maps  and  75  Illustrations,     y.  6d.  \ 

Macaulay's  (Lord)  Essays   and  Lays.      With  ' 

Portrait  and  Illustration.     3J-.  6d.  j 

Macleod's  (H.  D.)  The   Elements  of  Banking. 

y.  6d.  f 

Marshman's    (J.    C.)    Memoirs   of    Sir   Henry  { 

Havelock.     3^.  6d.  I 

Max  Miiller's  (F.)  India,  what  can  it  teach  us  ? 

Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
Max  Miiller's  (F.)  Introduction  to  the  Science 

of  Religion.     Cr.  8vo.  3J.  6d.  ' 

Merivale's    (Dean)    History    of    the    Romans 

under  the  Empire.     8  vols.     y.  6d.  each. 
Mill's  (J.  S.)  Principles  of  Political  Economy. 

3S.  6d. 
Mill's  (J.  S.)  System  of  Logic.     3s.  6d. 


SILVER  LIBRARY  {THE)~c:>i,ti,nu'd. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Historical  Sketches.      3 

vols.     y.  6d.  each. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Apologia  Pro  VitS  Sua. 

3S.  6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Callista:   a  Tale  of  the 

Third  Century.     3s.  6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Loss  and  Gain :  a  Tale. 

3,..  6d. 
Newman's    (Cardinal)    Essays,    Critical    and 

Historical.     2  vols.     js. 
Newman's     (Cardinal)     An     Essay     on     the 

Development  of  Christian  Doctrine.     3^.  6d. 
Newman's     (Cardinal)     The     Arians     of    the 

Fourth  Century.     3^.  6d. 
Newman's     (Cardinal)     Verses     on     Various 

Occasions.     3s.   6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  The  Present  Position  of 

Catholics  in  England.     3s.  6d. 
Newman's    (Cardinal)    Parochial    and    Plain 

Sermons.     8  vols.     3s.  6d.  each. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Selection,  adapted  to  the 

Seasons  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Year,  from  the 

'  Parochial  and  Plain  Sermons  '.     3s.  6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Sermons   bearing  upon 

Subjects  of  the  Day.      Edited  by  the  Rev. 

W.  J.  Copeland,  B.D.,  late  Rector  of  Farn- 

ham,  Esse.x.     3s.  6d. 
Newman's     (Cardinal)     DifRculties     felt     by 

Anglicans  in  Catholic  Teaching  Considered. 

2  vols.     3.f.  6d.  each. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  The  Idea  of  a  University 

Defined  and  Illustrated.     3s.  6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Biblical  and  Ecclesias- 
tical Miracles.     3s.  6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Discussions  and  Argu- 
ments on  Various  Subjects.     3s.  6d. 
Newman's    (Cardinal)    Grammar   of    Assent. 

y.  6d. 
Newman's       (Cardinal)       Fifteen       Sermons 

Preached  before  the  University  of  Oxford. 

Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  Lectures  on  the  Doctrine 

of  Justification.     Cr.  8vo.  3^-.  6d. 
Newman's    (Cardinal)    Sermons    on    Various 

Occasions.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
Newman's  (Cardinal)  The  Via  Media  of  the 

Anglican  Church,  illustrated  in  Lectures,  &c. 

2  vols.     3s.  6d.  each. 
Newman's     (Cardinal)    Discourses    to    Mixed 

Congregations.     3.f.  6d. 
Phillipps-Wolley's  (C.)  Snap  :  a  Legend  of  the 

Lone    Mountain.       With    13    Illustrations. 

3s.   6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Worlds  than  Ours.  3s.6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Rough  Ways  made  Smooth. 

35.  6d.  ■ 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Pleasant  Ways  in   Science. 

3J-.  dd. 
Stanley's  (Bishop)  Familiar  History  of  Birds. 

160  Illustrations.     3s.  6d. 
Stevenson    (R.   L.)   and   Osbourne's  (LI.)  The 

Wrong  Box.     Cr.  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

[Coiitiiiiu'd  on  next  page. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE 


SILVER  LIBRARY  [THR)— continued. 

Weyman's  (Stanley  J.)  The  House  of  the 
Wolf:  a  Romance.     Cr.  8vo.  y.  6d. 

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Petland  Revisited.  With 
33  Illustrations.     3.f.  6d. 

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Strange  Dwellings.  With 
60  Illustrations.     3^'.  6d. 

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Out  of  Doors.  11  Illustra- 
tions.    3.f.  6d. 

SMITH  (R.  Bosworth). 

CARTHAGE  AND  THE  CARTHA- 
GINIANS. With  Maps,  Plans,  &c.  Cr. 
8vo.  65. 

SOPHOCLES.  Translated  into  English 
Verse.  By  Robert  Whitelaw,  M.A., 
Assistant  Master  in  Rugby  School ;  late 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Cr.  8vo.   8s.  6d. 

STEPHEN  (Sir  James). 

ESSAYS  IN  ECCLESIASTICAL  BIO- 
GRAPHY.    Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

STEPHENS  (H.  Morse). 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  FRENCH  RE- 
VOLUTION. 3  vols.  8vo.  Vols.  I. 
and  II.  185.  each. 

STEVENSON  (Robert  Louis). 

A    CHILD'S    GARDEN    OF    VERSES. 

Small  Fcp.  8vo.  5s. 
A    CHILD'S    GARLAND    OF    SONGS, 

Gathered    from    '  A    Child's    Garden    of 

Verses  '.     Set  to  Music   by  C.   Villiers 

Stanford,   Mus.   Doc.      4to.  25.   sewed. 

3s.  6d.  cloth  gilt. 
THE  DYNAMITER.     Fcp.  8vo.  is.  sewed. 

IS.  6d.  cloth. 
STRANGE    CASE    OF    DR.    JEKYLL 

AND  MR.  HYDE.     Fcp.  8vo.  is.  sewed. 

IS.  6(f.  cloth. 

STEVENSON   (Robert   Louis)  and   OS- 
BOURNE  (Lloyd), 
THE   WRONG  BOX.     Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

STOCK  (St.  George). 

DEDUCTIVE  LOGIC.     Fcp.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

'STONEHENGE'. 
THE    DOG    IN    HEALTH    AND    DIS- 
EASE.      With    84    Wood     Engravings. 
Square  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

STRONG  (Herbert  A.,  M.A.,  LL.D.), 
LOGEMAN  (Vi^illera  S.),  and 
WHEELER  (Benjamin  Ide). 
INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 
OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  LANGUAGE. 
8vo.  I  OS.  6d. 


STURGIS  (Julian,   Author  of  '  My  Friends 
and  I,'  '  Thraldom,'  &c.). 
AFTER    TWENTY    YEARS,  and  other 
Stories.     Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

SULLY  (James). 

THE  HUMAN  MIND:    a  Text- Book  of 
I  Psychology.     2  vols.     Svo.  21s. 

I      OUTLINES    OF  PSYCHOLOGY.      Svo. 
j  9s. 

THE     TEACHER'S     HANDBOOK    OF 
I  PSYCHOLOGY.     Cr.  Svo.  5s. 

\  SUPERNATURAL    RELIGION:    an    In- 
i  quiry  into  the  Reality  of  Divine  Revela- 

tion.    3  vols.     Svo.  365. 
REPLY    (A)    TO    DR.    LIGHTFOOTS 
ESSAYS.      By  the   Author   of  'Super- 
natural Religion  '.     Svo.  7s.  6rf. 

SUTTNER  (Bertha  von). 

LAY  DOWN  YOUR  ARMS  {Die  Waffar 
Nicdcr)  :  The  Autobiography  of  Martha 
Tilling.  Translated  bv  T.  Holmes. 
Cr.  Svo.  7s.  6d. 

SWINBURNE  (A.  J.,  B.A.). 

PICTURE  LOGIC  :  an  Attempt  to  Popu- 
larise the  Science  of  Reasoning.  Post 
Svo.  5s. 

SYMES  (J.  E.). 

PRELUDE  TO  MODERN  HISTORY: 
being  a  Brief  Sketch  of  the  World's 
History  from  the  Third  to  the  Ninth 
Century.     With  5  Maps.     Cr.  Svo.  2s.  Gd. 

A  COMPANION  TO  SCHOOL  HIS- 
TORIES   OF    ENGLAND.      Cr.    Svo. 

2S.    6d. 

POLITICAL  ECONOMY.  With  Problems 
for  Solution,  and  Hints  for  Supplementary 
Reading.     Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

TAYLOR  (Colonel  Meadov^rs,  C.S.I.,  &c.). 
i  A  STUDENT'S  MANUAL  OF  THE 
I  HISTORY  OF  INDIA.    Cr.  Svo.  7s.  6d. 

\  THOMPSON  (D.  Greenleaf). 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  EVIL:  an  Intro- 
duction to  the  Practical  Sciences.  Svo. 
10s.  6d. 

A  SYSTEM  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.  2  vols. 
Svo.  36s. 

THE  RELIGIOUS  SENTIMENTS  OF 
THE  HUMAN  MIND.     Svo.  7s.  6d. 

SOCIAL  PROGRESS:  an  Essay.  Svo.. 
7s.  6d. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  FICTION  IN 
LITERATURE:  an  Essay.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

THOMPSON  (Annie). 

A  MORAL  DILEMMA  :  a  Novel.  Cr. 
Svo.  6s. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS.  LONGMANS,  GREEN.  &  CO. 


THOMSON   (Most  Rev.  William,    D.D.,  j 

late  Archbishop  of  York).  | 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  NECESSARY  \ 
LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  :  a  Treatise  on  j 
Pure  and  Applied  Logic.     Post  Svo.  65. 

THREE  IN  NOR  IV A  Y.     By  Two  of  Them. 
With   a  Map   and   59    Illustrations.      Cr.  I 
Svo.  2s.  boards.     2s.  6d.  cloth. 

TOYNBEE  (Arnold).  i 

LECTURES  ON  THE  INDUSTRIAL 
REVOLUTION  OF  THE  18TH  CEN- 
TURY IN  ENGLAND.      Svo.   105.  6d. 

TREVELYAN  (Sir  G.  O.,   Bart). 

THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  LORD 
MACAU  LAY. 

Popular  Edition.      Cr.  Svo.  25.  6d. 
Student's  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 
Cabinet  Edition.     2  vols.    Cr.  Svo.  12s. 
Library  Edition.      2  vols.     Svo.  36s. 
THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  CHARLES 
JAMES    FOX.     Library  Edition.     Svo. 
iSs.     Cabinet  Edition.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

TROLLOPE  (Anthony). 

THE     WARDEN.      Cr.    Svo.    is.   boards. 

IS.  6(f.  cloth. 
BARCHESTER   TOWERS.     Cr.  Svo.  is. 

boards,      is.  6r/.  cloth. 

VERNEY  (Frances  Parthenope). 

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  VERNEY  FAMILY 
DURING  THE  CIVIL  WAR.  Com- 
piled from  the  Letters  and  Illustrated  by 
the  Portraits  at  Claydon  House,  Bucks. 
With  a  Preface  by  S.  R.  Gardiner,  M.A., 
LL.D.  With  3S  Portraits,  Woodcuts  and 
Facsimile.     2  vols.     Royal  Svo.  42s. 

VILLE  (George). 

THE  PERPLEXED  FARMER  :  How  is 
he  to  meet  Alien  Competition  ?  Trans- 
lated from  the  French  by  William 
Crookes,  F.R.S.,  V.P.C.S.,  &c.  Cr. 
Svo.  5s. 

VIRGIL. 

PUBLI  VERGILI  MARONIS  BUCO- 
LIC A,  GEORGICA,  .ENEIS  :  The 
Works  of  Virgil,  Latin  Text,  with  Eng- 
lish Commentary  and  Index.  By  B.  H. 
Kennedy,  D.D.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  dd. 

THE  uENEID  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated 
into  English  Verse.  By  John  Coning- 
TON,  M.A.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

THE  POEMS  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated 
into  English  Prose.  By  John  Coning- 
TON,   M.A.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

THE  ECLOGUES  AND  GEORGICS 
OF  VIRGIL.  Translated  from  the  Latin 
by  J.  W.  Mackail,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
Balliol  College,  Oxford.  Printed  on 
Dutch  Hand-made  Paper.  Royal  i6mo.  5s. 


WAKEMAN  (Henry  Offley,  M.A.)  and 
HASSALL  (Arthur,  M.A.). 
ESSAYS  INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE 
STUDY  OF  ENGLISH  CONSTITU- 
TIONAL HISTORY.  By  Resident 
Members  of  the  Universitv  of  Oxford. 
Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

WALFORD     (L.      B.,     Author    of      'Mr. 

Smith  '). 
THE  MISCHIEF  OF  MONICA  :  a  Novel. 

Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 
THE  ONE  GOOD  GUEST  :  a  Story.     Cr. 

Svo.  6s. 
TWELVE  ENGLISH  AUTHORESSES. 

With    Portrait  of  Hannah   More.      Cr. 

Svo.  4s.  bd. 

WALKER  (Major  A.  Campbell-,F.R.G.S.). 
THE  CORRECT  CARD  :  or,  How  to  Play 
at  Whist;  a  Whist  Catechism.    Fcp.  Svo. 
2S.  6d. 

WALPOLE  (Spencer). 

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  FROM  THE 
CONCLUSION  OF  THE  GREAT 
WAR  IN  1815  TO  1858.  6  vols.  Cr. 
Svo.  6s.  each. 

THE  LAND  OF  HOME  RULE:  being 
an  Account  of  the  History  and  Institu- 
tions of  the  Isle  of  Man.      Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

WELLINGTON  (Duke  of). 

LIFE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  WELLING- 
TON. By  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig,  M.A. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

WEST  (B.  B.). 

HALF-HOURS  WITH  THE  MILLION- 
AIRES :  Showing  how  much  harder  it  is 
to  spend  a  million  than  to  make  it.  Cr. 
Svo.  6s. 

WEST    (Charles,    M.D.,    Founder   of    the 
Hospital  for  Sick  Children). 
THE  MOTHER'S  MANUAL  OF  CHIL- 
DREN'S DISEASES.     Fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

WEYMAN  (Stanley  J.). 

THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  WOLF:  a 
Romance.     Cr.  Svo.  ^s.  td. 

WHATELY  (E.  Jane). 

ENGLISH  SYNONYMS.      Edited  by  R. 

Whately,  D.D.     Fcp.  Svo.  3s. 
LIFE    AND    CORRESPONDENCE    OF 

RICHARD     WHATELY,     D.D.,     late 

Archbishop    of   Dublin.      With    Portrait. 

Cr.  Svo.   los.  Qd. 

WHATELY  (Archbishop). 

ELEMENTS  OF  LOGIC.    Cr.  Svo.  4s.  6f/. 
ELEMENTS  OF  RHETORIC.     Cr.  Svo. 
4s.  bd. 

[Continued  on  next  page. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS  IN  GENERAL  LITERATURE. 


WHATELY  {Kxc\Ca\5\iO^)— continued. 
LESSONS  ON  REASONING.    *Fcp.  8vo. 


BACONS    ESSAYS, 
8vo.   I05.  6d. 


with    Annotations. 


WHIST  IN  DIAGRAMS :  a  Supplement 
to  American  Whist,  Illustrated  ;  being  a 
Series  of  Hands  played  through,  Illus- 
trating the  American  leads,  the  new  play, 
the  forms  of  Finesse,  and  celebrated  coups 
of  Masters.  With  Explanation  and  Ana- 
lysis.    By  G.  W.  P.     Fcp.  8vo.  65.  6d. 

WILCOCKS  (J.  C). 

THE  SEA  FISHERMAN,  Comprising  the 
Chief  Methods  of  Hook  and  Line  Fishing 
in  the  British  and  other  Seas,  and  Remarks 
on  Nets,  Boats  and  Boating.  Profusely 
Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

WILLICK  (Charles  M.). 

POPULAR  TABLES  for  giving  Informa- 
tion for  ascertaining  the  value  of  Lifehold, 
Leasehold,  and  Church  Property,  the 
Public  Funds,  cS:c.  Edited  by  H.  Bence 
Jones.     Cr.  Svo.  105.  6d. 

WITT  (Professor).     Translated  by  Frances 

YOUNGHUSBAND. 

THE  TROJAN  WAR.     Cr.  Svo.  25. 

MYTHS  OF  HELLAS  :  or,  Greek  Tales. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.  dd. 

THE  WANDERINGS  OF  ULYSSES. 
Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 

THE  RETREAT  OF  THE  TEN  THOU- 
SAND :  being  the  Story  of  Xenophon's 
'  Anabasis '.  With  Illustrations.  Cr. 
Svo.  3s.  6d. 

WOLFF  (Henry  W.). 

RAMBLES  IN  THE  BLACK  FOREST. 

Cr.  Svo.  7s.  6d. 
THE    WATERING   PLACES   OF  THE 

VOSGES.     Cr.  Svo.  4s.  6d. 
THE    COUNTRY   OF    THE    VOSGES. 

With  a  Map.     Svo.  125. 

WOOD  (Rev.  J.  G.). 

HOMES  WITHOUT  HANDS:  a  De- 
scription of  the  Habitation  of  Animals, 
classed  according  to  the  Principle  of  Con- 
struction. With  140  Illustrations.  Svo. 
ys.  net. 

INSECTS  AT  HOME.-  a  Popular  Account 
of  British  Insects,  their  Structure,  Habits 
and  Transformations.  With  700  Illustra- 
tions.    Svo.  75.  net. 

INSECTS  ABROAD:  a  Popular  Account 
of  Foreign  Insects,  their  Structure,  Habits 
and  Transformations.  With  600  Illustra- 
tions.    Svo.  75.  net. 

10,000/1/93. 


THE    ABERDEEN    UNIVERSITY    PRESS 


WOOD  (Rev.  J.  G.)—contimted. 

BIBLE  ANIMALS:  a  Description  of 
every  Living  Creature  mentioned  in  the 
Scriptures.  With  112  Illustrations.  Svo. 
ys.  net. 

STRANGE  DWELLINGS:  a  Description 
of  the  Habitations  of  Animals,  abridged 
from  '  Homes  without  Hands'.  With  60 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

OUT  OF  DOORS  :  a  Selection  of  Original 
Articles  on  Practical  Natural  History. 
With  II  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

PE  TLA  ND  RE  VISITED.  With  33  Illus- 
trations.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 

BIRD  LIFE  OF  THE  BIBLE.  32 
Illustrations.      Cr.  Svo.  35.  6(/. 

WONDERFUL  NESTS.  30  Illustrations. 
Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6<f. 

HOMES  UNDER  THE  GROUND.  28 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

WILD  ANIMALS  OF  THE  BIBLE.  29 
Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.  35.  6d. 

DOMESTIC  ANIMALS  OF  THE 
BIBLE.  23  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6<f. 

THE  BRANCH  BUILDERS.  28  Illus- 
trations.    Cr.  Svo.  2S.  6d. 

SOCIAL  HABITATIONS  AND  PARA- 
SITIC NESTS.  iS  Illustrations.  Cr. 
Svo.  2S. 

WORDSWORTH        (Charles,       D.C.L., 

Bisliop  of  St.   Andrews). 
ANNALS  OF  MY  EARLY  LIFE,   1806- 
1846.     Svo.  155. 

WYLIE  (James  Hamilton). 

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  UNDER 
HENRY  IV.  2  vols.  ¥01.1.1399-1404. 
Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d.     Vol.  II.     [In  the  Press. 

ZELLER  (Dr.   E.). 

HISTORY      OF      ECLECTICISM      IN 

GREEK    PHILOSOPHY.      Translated 

by  Sarah  F.  Alleyne.     Cr.  Svo.  105.  6d. 
THE     STOICS,     EPICUREANS     AND 

SCEPTICS.     Translated  by  the  Rev.  O. 

J.  Reichel,  M.A.     Cr.  Svo.  15s. 
SOCRATES    AND     THE     SOCRATIC 

SCHOOLS.     Translated  by  the  Rev.  O. 

J.  Reichel,  M.A.     Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d. 
PLATO  AND  THE  OLDER  ACADEMY. 

Translated   by  Sarah   F.   Alleyne  and 

Alfred  Goodwin,  B.A.     Cr.  Svo.  185. 
THE    PRE-SOCRATIC    SCHOOLS:     a 

History  of  Greek    Philosophy   from    the 

Earliest  Period  to  the  time  of  Socrates. 

Translated   by  Sarah    F.   Alleyne.      2 

vols.     Cr.  Svo.  305. 
OUTLINES    OF    THE    HISTORY    OF 

GREEK    PHILOSOPHY.      Translated 

by    Sarah    F.    Alleyne    and    Evelyn 

Abbott.     Cr.  Svo.  105.  6d. 

7 


HI 


DATE  DUE                          1 

Hftr'2  t5  1981 

CAVLOMO 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

rillirnri^V.'iPf.L^E  LIBRARY 


3  5002   03009  822   7 


